བོདཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་བ།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
TBRC Volume Number 4418
TBRC Work Number (W ) 26078
Title
 གེ་སར
ge sar
Descriptor
Original Publication
Placc
 thimphu
Publisher kunsang tobgyel
Date 1979-1984
Total Volumes
Current Volume (of Total)
Number of TBRC Introductory Pages
Number of Introductory Pages
Number of Text Pages 
494
TBRC Scanning Information scanned at m /s satluj infotech images, 63-f sujan singh park, new
delhi 110003, india for the tibetan buddhist resource center, 150
17th st., new york city, ny 10011, usa 2004

LC Control Number: 
79906507
Type of Material: Text (Book, Microform , Electronic, etc.)
Uniform Title:
 [Gesar.
Main Title: The epic of Gesar / with Tibetan introd.
by Lopon Pemala and English introd. by
R . A . Stein.
Published /Created : Thimphu : Kunsang Tobgyel, 1979-1984.
Related Titles:
 'Dzam glin Ge-sar rgyal po'i rtogs brjod
Sna tshogs gtam gyi phren ba.
Description : 31 v. : ill. ; 23 cm .
Notes: Cover title: 'Dzam glin Ge-sar rgyal po'i
rtogs
brjod sna tshogs gtam gyi phren ba.
In Tibetan,
In Tibetan.
Subjects: Epic literature, Tibetan .
LC Classification : PL3748 G4 1979

THE EPIC OF GESAR
with
Tibetan Iotroduction by Lopon Pemala
Director, National Library of Bhutan, Thimphu
and
English Introduction by R. A. Stein
Professor, College de France, Paris
VOLUME 29
THIMPHU, BHUTAN
1981

PUBLISHED BY KUNZANG TOBGYEL
Druk Sherig Press, Post Box 188
Thimphu, Bhutan
and
Printed at the Jayyed Press
Ballimaran, Delhi-110006
Price Rs. 350/- per Volume
The complete collection of Gesar's Epic undertaken here will
comprise in thirty one volumes. The detailed list of contents
will be given in the last of these volumes.

CONTENTS
Pago
Foreword by B. S. Guha .. 
vii
Introduction by S. K . Chatterji 
.. a
Preface by A . H . Francke xxviii
1. [ གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་གྱི་སྐྱེ་རབས་]
Prologue to the Kesar Saga
Vocabulary and Comments
2. [ གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་སྐྱེ་རབས་] .
The Story of Kesar's Birth
Appendix . ..
Vocabulary and Comments
: [ 
84
ཀེ་སར་དང་འབྲུ་གུ་མའི་བག་སྟོན་གྱི་སྒྲུངས་]
The Story of ’aBruguma's Marriage to Kesar .. 122
Vocabulary and Notes 129
4. [ 
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་རྒྱ་ནག་བཏུལ་པའི་སྒྲུངས་] ： ，， 19
Kosar's Journey to China and Marriage with gYui dkon
mChogmo .. 154
Notes
158
Vocabulary and Comments 180
8. [ ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བདུད་བཏུལ་བའི་སྒྲུངས་] 
• ， 14
Kesar's Victory over the Giant of the North ， 189
Vocabulary and Comments ， I95
༦. [ 
290
ཧོར་གྱིས་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ཁྱེར་བའི་སྒྲུངས་
] . 
Capture of ’a Bruguma by the King of Hor 
Vocabulary and Comments 250

CONTENTS
Page
256
7. LĪ * era el a a5V' 'xv"] ..
Defeat of the King of Hor
Vocabulary ..
List of personal and local names and other proper nouns
Kosar Saga
Appendices :
373
I. The Spring Myth of the Kesar Saga
407
II. The Winter Myth of the Kesar Saga
429
ILI. A Ladakhi Bon Pa Hymnal
440
IV. Ladakhi Songs
V. The Ladakhi Pre-Buddhist Marriage Ritual 453
482
VI. The Paladins of the Kesar Saga

FOREWORD
The legend of the Tibetan King Kesar (or Gesar) is the most widely
known hero-myth of Central Asia and holds the same position as the
story of Rama in this country. Numerous versions of this legend in
songs, lyric poems and prose romances exist in Tibet, Mongolia and
China, and a vast mass of literature has grown around this theme in
these countries. As far as is known the earliest accounts of the Saga
were published in Europe in 1836 in the form of German renderings of
portions of the Kalmuck text written in Pekin in 1716 by the command
of the Emperor Kang-hsi. Since then other versions have been published
including the French and English translations of a Tibetan prose work
by Madame David -Neel in 1933. These recensions seem , however, to be
later and much coloured by the ideas of Lamaistic Buddhism , At the
beginning of the present century Dr. A . H . Francke, a Moravian missionary
in Ladakh, discovered two versions of the Kesar story current there
which he succeeded in getting written down. The Leb version, collected
by Dr. Francke together with text, translation, notes, etc., was published
in the Memoirs of the Finno-Ugrian Society of Helsingfors in 1900.
The second version, from Khalatse of Lower Ladakh, appears to be the
oldest and the most important corpus of the Kesar legend so far found,
and developed wholly in the horizon of the pre- Buddhistic Bon religion
and free from all Lamaistic taints. The Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal
undertook to publish the original text of this version with an English
summary and notes, etc., in the Bibliotheca Indica Series, and during the
period from 1905 to 1909 four fascicles were printed . The last fascicle
containing the Title-pages, Preface, Contents and Index was sent by
the author in 1925, but the period of quiescence that followed in the
Society's activities must have been responsible for the non-publication of
the work . In the meantime, the author passer away in 1933. After
the re-organization of the work of the Society was undertaken in 1939,
the last fuscicle of the Kesar Saga, left partly in proof and partly in MSS .
by Dr. Francke, was entrusted to Dr. S. K . Chatterji, D .Lit., Philological
Secretary, for early publication. Dr. Chatterji has contributed a general
introduction containing the history and a dissertation on the place of the
Baga in the life and literature of Central Asia , and at his suggestion six
articles on the Kesar Saga already published by Dr. Francke in the
( vii )

vü FOREWORD
Indian Antiquary, Mem . Finno-Ugrian Society, and J. P . A .S .B ., between
1901-1907, which have now become rare, have been included as
appendices in the present work for the benefit of scholars. These air
Articles are as follows:
1. The Spring Myth of the Keser Saga.
(The Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, pp. 329-34) ;
Vol. XXXI, 1902, pp. 32-40.)
2. The Winter Myth of the Kesar Saga.
(This English version is published for the first time. A
few of Francke's notes are incorporated . The Tibetan
Text and Francke's German Translation appeared in the
Suomalais-urgrilaisen Seuran toimituksia XV (Memoirs of
the Finno-Ugrian Society XV), Helsingfors, 1902.)
3. A Ladakhi Bon -Pa Hymnal.
(The Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, pp. 359- 364.)
4 . Ladakhi Songs.
(The Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXXI, 1902, pp. 304– 311.)
5. The Ladakhi Pre-Buddhist Marriage Ritual.
(The Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX , 1901, pp. 131- 149.)
6. The Paladins of the Kesar Saga.
(Journ. Proc. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, N .S., Vol. II, 1906,
pp. 467 -469.)
The Society is indebted to Dr. Bata Krishna Ghosh , Ph.D ., for having
kindly supplied us in collaboration with Prof. Chatterji with an English
translation (Appendix 2) of Dr. Francke's original German account
of the Winter Myth of the Kesar Saga published in the Memoirs of the
Finno-Ugrian Society of Helsingfors.
It is to be hoped that the completion of this very important work
will remove a long-felt desideratum of scholars interested in the linguistics,
religion and social institutions of ancient Tibet.
B. S. Guha,
General Secretary,
Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal.
Calcutta ,
November 15 , 1941.

INTRODUCTION
THE SAGA OF KING KESAR
1. The Bod or Tibetan People , and the Bon Religion .
Tibet is now recognised as one of the Buddhist countries. A good
deal if not almost all of what is noble and beautiful and indicative of high
culture in present-day Tibet came with Buddhism , and it was largely
India and to some extent China which gave to Tibet its civilisation .
The Tibetans are the kingmen of the Burmese, the Siamese and the
Chinese in language, if not wholly in race. This group of peoples, to
which the name Sino-Tibetan or Tibeto-Chinese has been given, had
developed its distinctive speech and the bases of its characteristio
oulture near the head -waters of the Yang-tsze-Kiang (or it may be in
North China, in the valley of the Hwang-Ho) several thousand years
before Christ.
One branch of them went north-east into North China and settled
there, or stayed on in their original bome in the Hwang-Ho valley, long
before 2000. B .C ., and there it became the ancient Chinese people,
who built up a very high and original type of civilisation before 1500 B.C.,
which independently of any other cultures reached its highest point
during the first year-thousand before Christ, and attained still further
development through contact with Buddhism and Indian civilisation
during the first year-thousand after Christ. Two other groups of the
same primitive Tibeto-Chinese people, who later came to be known as the
Dai (or Thai) and as the Mran-må, descended from their original home.
land further to the south, and were settled in Northern Burma, Southern
China and Northern Indo-China — the Mran-mā in Northern Burma,
and the Dai in South China and Northern Indo-China . Central and
Southern Burma and Southern Indo-China in ancient times were
inhabited by the Rmañ people (later known as Mon or Mun, through
modification of the word ) in Rāmañña-dēsa or Suvarna-bhūmi, i.e . South
and Central Burma and Dvărāvatī, i.e. South Siam , and by the Khmer
people in Cambodia. These Rmañ (Mon ) and Khmer peoples were Austro .
Asiatic by language, distinct from the Tibeto-Chinese, and had already,
during the early centuries of the Christian era, Indianised themselves in
religion and culture by adopting Brahmanism and Buddhism and Indian
ix

INTRODUOTION
ways of life, with Sanskrit as their sacred language. The Mran-mā,
later known as the Byamma, conquered the Rmañ or Mons, and
absorbed them and adopted their Indian culture, and became the Burmese
people : the history of Burma has been the history of a long conflict
between the Mran-mā and the Rmañ , between the Sino-Tibetan Burmans
and the Austro-Asiatic Mons, and it ended in a final triumph of the
Northern Sino- Tibetan invaders, the Mons dying as a people but pro
foundly influencing the Burmans in almost everything except language.
The Dai or Thai similarly assimilated a large Mon element in Siam and
adopted the Indian culture of the latter, and were further profoundly
modified by the Khmers, Austro -Asiatic kinsmen of the Mons, who still
live as a separat people. Thai tribes now occupy Eastern Burma (as the
Shane), Siam , and part of French Indo-China (as the Laos) ; while masses
of them were transformed into South Chinese people through the cultural
influence of North and Central China. One branch of the Thai, the
Ahoms, penetrated into Assam during the first half of the 13th century,
and supplied the ruling house in that part of India , giving to it their
name (Aham or Asam ), and ultimately becoming completely Hinduised .
A fourth hand of the Tibeto-Chinese are the Tibetans. They appear
to have mingled racially with cattle-raising Central Asian tribes of
Mongoloid and Indo-European origin (like the Mongols, the Turks and
the Sakas or Scythians), for the Tibetans are the only people of the
Tibeto -Chinese linguistic group who adopted milk and milk -products
like butter and cheese as an important article of food. They settled
in Tibet, according to a later Buddhist tradition , or reconstruction
of past history, of very doubtful bistorical value, sometime during the
middle of the first year-thousand before Christ, when Buddha lived
and preached in India. This group of Tibeto -Chinese called itself
Bod , a name which was current at least as early as the middle of the
first millennium A . D . ; and this name has survived to our day, although
in a modified form , as Pö or Phö. The Indians who came in touch with
this group of the Sino-Tibetana, probably for the first time during the
early centuries of the Christian era, changed the naine Bod into Bhola ,
which is the Sanskrit and other North Indian term for Tibet and the
Tibetans. (Was the voiced aspirate Bh- heard dialectally in this word in
ancient Tibet — so that a variant * Bhod , or * Bhot, gave the Indian
form of the word ? We should note the aspirated modern Tibetan Pho.)
This Bod -Bhõta- Pö people, i.e. the Tibetans, were for a long number
of centuries in a barbarous or semi-civilised state. Some groups

INTRODUCTION xi
of these Tibetans, or tribes allied though not exactly identical with
them , penetrated into the foothills of the Himalayas and so came
into India , advancing well enough even into the plains of North Bengal.
Others settled in Ansam and the Indo-Burmese frontier : but these
were tribes rather distinct from both the Tibetans and the Burmese.
There is no record of the first contact between the Tibetans and the
Indians. Before the acceptance of Buddhism by the powerful King
of Tibet Srong-btsan -agam -po in the seventh century, this contact, it
can be assumed, was sufficiently long and close. Srong-btsan-sgam -po
(who reigned c. 630 -850 A.D . and was thus a contemporary of Emperor
Harsha-vardhana of North India ) maintained political relations (which,
according to tradition, were cemented by marriage) with India (Nepal)
and with China. (In the seventh century A.D ., it is likely that Nopal
was already inhabited , as now, by an Indianised and mixed people with
primitive Mongoloid elements.) The Tibetan scholar Thon -mi Sambhota
was sent by this king to India, and he adapted the Indian alphabet
for the Tibetan language, which was first written down during this
century. The final affiliation of Tibetan culture to those of India
on the one hand and China on the other was effected during the reign
of Srong-btsan-agam -po ; the traditional story of his marriage with a
princess of Nepal and .a princess of China (Buddhist legend saw in
them the incarnations respectively of Syama-Tārā or ' Dark Tārā ' and
Sita -Tārā or 'White Tārā ', two foring of Tārā, the Sakli of Lökēšvara,
i.e. the Bodhisattva Avalökitēśvara) may be looked ripon as a symbolisa .
tion of this event, if its historicity is doubted .
The religion which the Tibetans followed before their acceptance
of Buddhism is known as the Bon religion. It was originally a form
of primitive Shamanism - belief in unseen powers which were either
harmless or harmful for man, and which could be controlled by man
through magical rites and incantations (the name being from the word
Shaman, a Mongol transformation of ihe Sanskrit Sramoni, which is
applied to the ; riests of Central Asian Buddhism , and , by extension, to
the priest-magicians of the pre-Buddhist religion of the Mongol world).
Such a religion appears to have developed not only among the primitive
Tibeto-Chinese, but also among their kinsmen of the Mongol or Yellow
race - the Uralic peoples (Lapps, Finn , Esthx, Vogus, Ostyaks, Magyars,
etc.), the Altaic peoples (Mongols, Manchus, Turks, etc.), and others,
and the Red Men of the two Americas. One of the noteworthy
characteristics of this Shamanism , including the Bon religion, is the

хіі INTRODUCTION
faith in the power of the magical word , which, by constant repetition
with the prescribed ritual, can compel supernatural 
powers, gods,
devils or spirits, to come under the control of man. Penances of various
sorts and offering of sacrifices were considered efficacious to bring the
favour of the gods and spirits. As in most religions (even the so-called
monotheistic ones), the world was believed to be full of spirits, and
people were encouraged to believe in their presence and potency, and in
magic. There are numerous points of agreement between Bon Sham
anism and certain forms of Hindu Tantricism , in ideas as well as in
ritual. Like the Hindu conception of Puruşa and Prakrti, or Siva
and Sakti, like the similar Chinese conception of Yang or the Male
Principle and Yin or the Female Principle, operating in the creation
and maintenance of the universe, the Tibetans also have the idea of
Yab .Yum or 'Father and Mother', of the Male and Female Principles.
It may be permissible to assume that both the Chinese idea of Yang-Yin
and the Tibetan one of Yab-Yum originated in some common ideology
of an analogous nature among the primitive Sino-Tibetan ancestors of
both the peoples : the Chinese conception shows (80 far as the Chinese
characters for Yang and Yin in their composition reveal) the presence
of the ideas of light and darkness, of heat and cold , in nature, emanating
from the Male and Female Principles underlying all existence, Among
the Tibetans, there is ample evidence of the presence of the conception
of a King of Heaven ' and a ' Queen of Heaven ', which is based , like
our Indian figures of Siva and Uma, on the idea of Yab-Yum , of
'Father and Mother '. The ancient Chinese also conceived of their
great Mother Goddess, Si-wang-Mu or ' the Queen Mother of the
West ', as an embodiment of Yin or the Female Principle, and her male
counterpart was Tung-wang-Kung or ' the Just King of the East ',
who represented Yang or the Male Principle. The Hindus of course
developed & mystic philosophy, as the basis of this mythological
conception, of Brahman and Mayā, of the Supreme Spirit (Purusa )
and Nature or Matter (Prakrti), of Sat (that which exists--the Positive
Principle) and Asat (that which does not exist---the Negative Principle ),
of the Unmanifest (Avyakta) and the Manifest (Vyakta ), etc., which
is not found in the case of the Tibetan Yab-Yum and the Chinese
Yang-Yin , at least in such deep and wide ramifications: nevertheless,
the occurrence, probably independent occurrence, of this conception
among these two distinctive peoples of the Middle and Far East,
namely, the mixed Austro -Asiatic, Dravidian and Aryan Hindus, and

INTRODUCTION
 xiii
the Sino-Tibetans, is noteworthy. It may be imagined that the
Yab-Yum idea belonged to the native Bon religion of the Tibetans,
and it was adopted into the Mahāyāna Buddhism of Tibet, itself
modified by Sākta Tantric icleas and practices on the soil of India.
It may also be asked if the Bon religion of the primitive Tibetans is not
connected with the religion of the ancient Chineso as it manifestod
itself, c.g., in the ritual and mythology of Tao-ism , and in the popular
side of the religion which was officialized by Confucius. As two important
branches of the same race or spoech-group, they may be expected to
have preserved some common inheritances.
In the racial sensitiveness of the Tibetans, there uppears to be
present a predilection for the apprehension of the wonderful and thu
spiritual through the intermediacyof the terriblu rather than the beautiful;
and, as a consequence, both in the Bon religion and in Tibetan Buddhism
gods and goddesses of a frightful aspect wore as much or perhaps moro
in evidence than those of a benign and gracious form . The wild and
desolate natural background of Tibet, with its snow -capped mountains
and its desert plains, devoid generally of the softness and beauty of
greenery, was probably responsible for this mentality of the Tibetans,
in their mythological conceptions and imaginings.
From the seventh century onwarris, right down to recent times,
attempts were frequently made to strengthen Buddhism in Tibet and
at the same time to suppress entirely the Bon religion ; but the Bon
faith never died out. What has happened in other lands has also
happened in Tibet. Mahāyāna Budilhism with its Tantric colouring froni
India , and the native Bon religion of Tibeta-those two have influenced
each other, and influenced profoundly. The Buddhism of Tibet is full of
Tantric practices and ideas, and many of its theories and practices
Áppear to bo nothing but Bon ideas and practices which were but sub
merged and not destroyed by Buddhism . The Buildhism of Tibet,
Lamaism , thus received its distinctive colouring from the earlier Bon
religion. Tibetan life retains a good doal of its Bon bases. And the Bon
religion, too, in the forin in which it survives in Tibet, has beon profoundly
modified by Indian Buddhistie notions and practices such its developerlin
Bungal, Bihar und Nupal during the closing conturies of the first millen
nium A.D . Buddhist ideas, Buldhist mythology, Buddhist practices
and Buddhist monastie organisation - ll these have inextricably com
mingled with the Bon religion of tho present day. Although the
Bucklhistic ruling classes of Tibet do not officially recognise the Bon

INTRODUCTION
xiv
religion, it still persists 89 a faith suppressed or overlaid , particularly in
Eastern Tibet. There are Bon priests, Bon temples and Bon monasteries,
fairly well-organised ; and Bon hagiologies imitate the Buddhist 'Golden
Legends of Tibet. But it would be impossible to find the Bon religion in
its pristine purity anywhere it does not exist in life, though vestiges of
it may be expected to survive in the older literature of Tibet.
The mixed Bon religion which is still current in Tibet is known as
Bsgyur Bon or modified Bon '. Sarat Chandra Dås gave an account
of the philosophy and mythology of this Begyur Bon (or Gyur Bon )
in the pages of the Journal and 'e:xt of the Buddhist Text Society, Calcutta,
for 1893 (Vol. I, Part I, January 1893, Appendix , pp. 1- 7 : ' A Brief
Sketch of the Bon Religion of Tibet - Gyur Bon or the Modified Bon ',
translated from Mdo Sermig and #dus-pa Rin -poche, life of Shen-rab
mi-wo ( = G :en-rab-mi-bo], the Bon teacher, and Sen-rab's great exploit;
Vol. I, Part II, May 1893, Appendix II, ' The Bon Religion : Bon Deities',
pp. 11-14, with plate giving figures of Bon gods; Vol. I, Part III,
November 1893, Appendix I, "The Principal Deities of the Bon
Pantheon ', pp. 1- 3, with plate similar to that in Part II). On
the ideal plane, this Begyur Bon presents 18 with some conceptions
of a high order. The highest aim of a Bon devoteo is to attain
to the position of the Eternal called Gyung Drung (= Sandtana in
Sanskrit), and at the saine time to retain his personality, with & view
to work for the good and welfare of all living beings of the world . Who.
ever endeavours to gain that supreme position must perform two kinds
of good work on this earth, viz., those of ordinary usefulness, and
those of supreme usefulness. In these two there are said to exist two
kinds of hindrances, one called Bgeg8-kyi Bar-chad, i.e. obstruction
caused by evil spirits , and the other called Dug-gis Bar-chad , i.e.
obstruction to virtue by dug, i.e. poison, or moral corruption '. By the
word bgegs, according to Bon mysticism , is understood the co -operating
cause ( = Sanskrit pratibandhaka, vighna), and dug (= vişa in Sanskrit),
i.e. poison , is the rgyu or the original cause (hētu in Sanskrit). The
dug consists of attachment to worldly objects, anger, stupidity - or
darkness, pride or vainglory, envy and joalousy --in short, all moral
sins and vices. The way to remove these obstructions is twofold :
to train up the mind in wisdom , in the first instance, to rid it of the dug,
and to perform religious and magical ceremonies and incantations to
remove the bgegs. In practical Bon , greater weight appears to be
placed on the second way. Bon deities are either wrathful in spirit,

INTRODUCTION XV
or mild and peaceful. Goddesses (Lha-mo) take precedence over the
gods. The Bon pantheon has not been systematised, and it is apparent
from the meagre details available about the Bon deities that they prosent
a good deal of agreement with the Budilhist Lamaistic pantheon of Tibet.
The pictures thet Sarat Chandra Das has given in the Buddhist Text
Society's papers givo a number of dancing figures, naked except for the
loin cloth, with heads of fanciful and frightful animals.
From the epic stories about the Tibetan Hero-King Kesar, and
from popular songs collected in Ladakh by Dr. A . H . Francke (which
are republished in the prosent volumo), Dr. Francke himself attempted
to deduce and describe a Bon pantheon, which as he suggosted
represented the Bon god -world in its primitive form , unmixed by
the notions of Lamaistic Buddhism (Tantricism and Mahāyāna ).
Because this pre-Buddhistic religion and pantheon es deduced
from the Ladakh poems and the Kesar tales differed in certain important
respects from the later, systematised Bon religion and pantheon - that
of the Bsgyur Bon --as in Bon-po MSS. published by Dr. B. Laufer,
Dr. Francko qualified what may be called the Bon religion of Ladakh
by the term Gling-Chos, i.e. "Mythology of Gling '--Gling being the namo
of the country over which the hero Kesar ruled , and originally the word
Gling ' probably meant 'the Earth '. Mr. Johan van Manen has an
informing paper on the Bsgyur Bon god Sgang-ba (Journal and Proceedings
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, New Series, Vol. XVIII, 1922, pp. 195 -222).
In that article Mr. Van Manen mentions some papers by Dr. B . Laufer
on Bon in the Toung Pao and other journals, and these, together with
Sarat Chandra Das's work, and that of Francke, exhausts all that is
evailable on Bon -Chos or the Bon Religion , pure or mixed.
The nature of the primitive or original Bon religion — its ideas and
its mythology- cannot be said to have been clearly and fully mado
known to us, despite the vory valuable work of Francke with the Ladakh
Kesar Saga. But it may be permissible to assume that the kernel
of much of what is found in the Begyur Bon (possibly the conception of
the Gyung Drung), and the pantheon of the Ladakhi Kesar Saga, together
with certain ideas analogous to Indian Tantricismı including the leaning to
wards sorcery and mysticism , are derived from the primitive Bon religion .
It was doubtless a religion with some organisation, claiming the homage
of the masses : that is why Indian Buddhism could not wholly stamp it
out, and bad to make a good deal of compromise with it. One thing
appears clear; in the Bon faith the Tibetans appear to have found somo

xvi INTRODUOTION
support for their language and for the culture that is associated with
language : for the Tibetans accepted Buddhism from India , but
not the Indian vocabulary (Sanskrit, Prakrit , or ' Bhāshā ') of Buddhism .
This suggests a well-formed literary tradition (although as yet
unwritten), a habit of taking recourse to the native language for
philosophical and other ideas. Like some other peoples- the Arabs,
the Uralic Finns, and the Polynesians— the primitive Tibetans appear to
have possessed the gift of the word, and to have lacked the cunning
of the hand — the plastic skill. Excepting what was connected with
their language, it would seem that they had no art traditions, and they
were content to accept in toto the art of India as it came to them
from Bengal and Bihar, directly and through Nepal; and, excepting
for slight imitations of the art of China, they kept the Indian tradition
intact for some thirteen centuries, adding scarcely anything of their own.
II. Kesar (Gesar), King of Gling, and the Kesar Saga.
· Like the story of Rāma and of Arjuna and the Pāņdavas in Indis ,
throughout the whole of Tibet, including Ladakh or Western Tibet which
is now a part of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, there is a popular
story or legend, that of King Kasar (of Gesar). Professor Sylvain Lévi has
called the Kesar story 'the Iliad of Central Asia ': we should add , it is
the Odyssey also . It forms, in fact, the combined Rāmāyaṇa and
Mahābhārata of the Tibetan people. The Mongols and the Manchus have
adopted Kesar as & national hero. He is honoured in China ; and it has
been supposed that his personality has contributed to the creation of
Kuan-ti, the Chinese God of War. It is now impossible to trace the
historicity of this hero : we do not know when he was born, and
in which part of Tibet he flourished. He is claimed by the East,
by Khams; he is claimed by the West, by Ladakh: and the Mongols
in the North think he was a Mongol hero . Dr. A . H . Francke considered
him entirely mythical humanisation of the Sun ; the Kesar Story
he thought was a Solar Myth . It is not unlikely ; but it may be
just equally possible that like the heroes in many another legend cycle,
like a Roland or an Arthur, a Cuchulainn or a Sigurd , Kesar was partly
historical and partly 
legendary.
In Tibet x mase of literature of various types have been found on
Keber: (1) songs or lyrics, which are sung on special occasions ; (2) short
lays or narratives in prose and verse, which are just told as tales ; (3) long

xvii
INTRODUCTION
narrative works in probe and verse which are chanted by trained reciters
taking several days or woeks ; and (4) huge works, mainly in verse, which
are comparable to the Indian Purānas. Of these (1), (2) and (3), until
they were written down by European scholars and translated into
German, English and French , formed part of the oral popular literature
of the Tibetans ; and (4 ) form written compositions in Tibetan, esteemed
for their romantic and edifying value. They show a progressive elabora
tion of the original story. The short songs and short narratives
in prose and verse as under (1) and (2) have been found in Ladakh or
Western Tibet; the late Dr. A . F. Francke, member of the Moravian
Mission in Ladakh, discovered and published these some forty years
ago. At least one long narrativo as under (3) has been found in Khama
or Eastern Tibet by Mme. Alexandra David -Neel. She heard it chanted
in the Khams dialect by a sort of rhapsodist at Jakyendo (Kyirku
or Lcher-ku ), a village in Eastern Tibet : he took over six weeks
to sing it through, giving two recitals of three hours each every day.
She also heard other rhapsodists sing the same story, and she had
MS. works on the epic to consult. On the basis of these, taking
the story in its most commonly accepted version in Eastern and
Central Tibet, Mme. David -Neel brought out French and English
versions of it, in collaboration with Lama Yongden , in 1933. (Cf.
The Super-human Life of Gesar of Ling, the legendary Tibetan Iero, as
sung by the Bards of his Country, by Alexandra David -Neel and the Lama
Yongden : with Preface by Sylvain Lévi: London , Rider & Co., 1933.)
The long compositions ss under (4) are exceedingly long indoed , and
Mme. David -Neel makes mention of one manuscript in her possession
" which treats of the single episode of Gesar's (i.e . Kesar's) struggles
against King Satham , and is seven hundred and forty-eight pages long '.
Mr. Johan van Manen 's similar long MSS. of episodes of the Kegar story
have been noted by Dr. Francke in bis Preface.
The Mongols received their Lamaistic Buddhism from the Tibetang,
during the 13th - 14th centuries, and by, that time the Kesar story had
taken up a Buddhist or Lamaist colouring, if it were really pre-Buddhistic
originally, and was passed on to the Mongols as a Buddhist story,
Then the Manchus, who are immediately related to the Mongols, came
to know it, and from the Manchus, the Chineso, after the former had
conquered the latter in the 17th century . It may be said that in a way
the Kesar story, emanating from the Tibetans, has become the common
property of the Mongolian peoples of Central and Eastern Asia .

xviii 
INTRODUCTION
Because of its romantic charm and its special flavour, the Kesar
Saga fully deserves to be regarded as a noteworthy literary heritage for
the whole of humanity.
It has been said before that nothing is known about the historicity
of Kesar. He may belong to the centuries before King Srong-btsan
sgam -po, some of whose achievements and qualities as a national
hero who established his people in their culture may have been transferred
to an earlier, pre-Buddhistic Kesar. He might have been later in
time. Whatever his historicity, there is no doubt that he has become
the National Hero of the Tibetans: in him have become incarnate as it
wore the Tibetan conception of the Ideal Man, Ideal Warrior and Ideal
King. He is a National Hero of the type of Rāma and Arjuna of India ,
Rustam of Persia, Gilgamesh of the Assyrio-Babylonjang, David of the
Jews, Hēraklēs and Akhilleus of ancient Greece, Sigurd-Siegfried of the old
Germanic world, King Arthur of the British (Welsh), and Cuchulainn
and Finn of the ancient Irish : an embodiment of the highest ideals and
aspirations of a whole people for centuries. The Tibetana, as well as
the Mongols and the Manchus, have almost made a cult of King Kesar:
they believe and hope that Kesar, who is now living in the Buddhist
heaven, will come down on earth once again , and will lead the peoples of
Central Asia to a glorious destiny.
Of the various forms in which the story of Kesar has been found,
the poems and the short prose and verse narratives (in two recensions)
which Dr. A . H . Francko obtained in Ladakh, present unquestionably
the shortest and the most beautiful versions of the story, and possibly
also the oldest; certainly these versions show the least admixture of
Buddhistic notions and mythology. The other versions — the long narra.
tives as recited by the minstrels, and the voluminous written tests- show
& very great elaboration and accompanying deterioration of the story.
Besides, in these bigger versions the Kesar legend has been very closely
interwoven with Lamaistic ideas and mythology. The longer narratives
have a different atmosphere altogether, when compared with the poems and
the sborter recensions obtained from Ladakh . The Lanaistic atmosphere
in these long versions in fact has enabled the story to win the approval of the
Buddhist scholars, and, consequently, to continue in popular favour. But
the Ladakh poems and recensions, as Dr. Francke has made it clear,
appear to be totally lacking in the Buddhist or Lamaistic spirit, popular
or hieratic. Of course, references to Buddhism , the religion establish
ed for over a thousand years, could not be eschewed in this mass of

xix
INTRODUCTION
popular literature: but its religious and cultural background is that
of the pre -Buddhistic Bon world . In other words, it becomes quite
clear from the simplest and most beautiful form in which the Kesar
Sags has been found in the poems and recensions discovered by Dr.
Francke in Ladakh, that the Saga took its rise within the lap of the Bon
religion, before the general acceptance of Buddhism by the Tibetans.
The songs which Dr. Francke found in Ladakh were published in
the original with English translation in the Indian Antiquary for 1901
and 1902. Of the two versions of the Kesar story, one (in two
recensions) was obtained from the village of Sheh , and the other from
Khalatse. The Sheh version was published in the original Ladakhi
Tibetan with translation and notes by the Finno-Ugrian Society of
Helsingfors in Finland in 1901 and 1902. This Sheh version is in
two parts, which Dr. Francke called the Spring Myth of the Kesar Saga
and the Winter Myth of the Kesar Saga The Spring Myth portion was
published in an English rendering, with notes and an analysis of the
Bon pantheon which can be deduced from it and from the poems, in
the Indian Antiquary for 1901 and 1902. The Khalatse version in the
original Tibetan , with English abstract of the various episodes and
notes on the Tibetan text, was taken up by the Asiatic Society of
Bengal for publication years ago. The text and the English abstract,
etc., were printed and made available to the public in four fasciclos
during 1905– 1909 ; and now it is being brought out in its complete form
in the present volume, which is considerably augmented with Notes
and Appendices giving all that Francke obtained from Ladakh relating
to the Kesar Saga — the Poems (in the original Tibetan and Francke's
English translation ), and the Sheh Recension (the whole of it, both the
Spring Myth and the Winter Myth ) in English, as well as the Supple
mentary Stories about the Paladins of the Kesar Saga. Dr. Francke's
Preface was written in 1925, and he sent a List of Personal and Local
Names and other Proper Nouns in the Kesar Saga as well as an Index
to the Words explained in connexion with the Kesar Saga ; but before
any of these could be printed, he passed away in 1933. So that
Dr. Franeke's Lower Ladakhi Version (i.e. the Khalalse Version ) of the
Kesar Saga remained to be completed by printing the Freface from the
author, and the List of Personal Names and the Index of Words as
prepared by him . In printing this Preface and the List of Personal
Names, it was thought that the other Ladakhi Version of the Kesar Saga ,
that from Sheh, in English translation, and the Ladakhi Poems connected

INTRODUCTION
with Kesar and with the Bon religion, as well as the Stories of the
Paladins, might advantageously be reprinted in the present book ;
which will thus give in one volume all the mass of Western Tibetan
(Ladakhi) materials collected , translated and commented 
upon by Dr.
Francke bearing on the Kenar Sage, and that in its simplest and most
primitive form . Only the Tibetan texts of the Sheh Version and
of the Stories of the Paladins are not given: these will be found
rospectively in the Memoirs of the Helsingfors Finno-Ugrian Society)
as noted above, and in the Journal and Proceedings of the (Royal)
Asiatic Society of Bengal for 1906 and 1907. The Index of (Tibetan ,
Words in the Ladakhi Kesar Saga texts is not included , as it can have
only a very specialised interest.
The value of these Francke texts for the study of the Kesar Saga
and of the Bon religion and pantheon cannot be over-estimated . As
Francke himself suggested in his Preface to the Khalatge Version about
these oral versions of the Kesar Saga, it is highly probable that they will
be of a similar usefulness for a thorough 
understanding of the Kesar-epio
EB are the Norse Versions of the Nibelungen Saga for the understanding
of the Nibelungen epic ! We have here a mass of additional material
in following the development of the romance and the epic from the
earlier lyric, ballad and tale in prose and verse, such as has been seen
in the case of heroic and romantic story cycles among other peoples.
In 1836 I. J. Schmidt published from St. Petersburg a German
translation of & romance of Kesar from the Mongol language. The Kesar
story was noted by others, but no definite text or translation was available,
before Dr. Francke procured the Ladakh recensions and poems about
1900. Thus Sir Charles Bell in his People of Tibet (Oxford, 1928) notes
(p. 10): 'It is to this legendary period that the great Tibetan Saga or
epic belongs. It tells of Ke-sar, the King of Ling, a country in Tibet
or on the eastern border. The King of Hor, a neighbouring land, carried
off Ke-ear's wife. A war ensued to recover the queen , in which Ke-sar
was eventually victorious. The whole epic is full of tales of fighting
and miraculous prowess. In his dificulties King Ke-sar is aided by a
goddess, A -ni Gung-men Gyal-mo, his aunt, who helps him in his difficult
undertakings, just as the Grecian and Trojan heroes are protected and
guided by their gods and goddesses. The epic is a long one, and is
divided into three parts. There are no printed copies of it in Tibet, and
but few manuscript copies. It is recited orally by both men and women ,

xxi
INTRODOTION
especially among the pastoral tribes. There are many who can recite
it for days together without repeating themselves.'
It would thus appear that quite a number of different recensions
of the Kenar « pic aro current- in oral versions, in manuscripts, and also
in printed books: fór Dr. Giuseppe Tucci discovered in a monastery in
Spiti a Kesar epic, block -printed in the style of Buddhist books (Giuseppe
Tucci and E . Ghersi, Cronaca della Missione Scientifica Tucci nel Tibet
occidentale, 1933, Rome, 1934, p . 62). Before some of these are available
in modern printed editions, or before their contents at least are known,
it will not be possible to initiate a critical study of the Kenar legend.
The voluminous MSS, in the possession of Mme. David-Neel and of
Mr. van Manen are but part of the entire epic, probably in its latest
literary form : their collection and publication, and much more their
translation, would be a Herculean task which it does not seem likely
will be taken up by any scholar in the immediate future.
The Kesar Saga has also given a subject for Tibetan artists. In
Tibetan pictorial and sculptural art, Buddhist themes all but mono
polise the entire field . Images of Bon deities are found, and they are
not so uncommon. But Bon tharikas or scroll paintings are comparatively
rare. There are some twelve specimens of Bon thankas in the Musée
Guimet, some of which have already been described and reproduced
(Guide-Catalogue du Musée Guimet : Les Collections Bouddhiques :
Inde Centrale et Gandhara, Turkestan, Chine Septentrionale, Tibet, by
J. Hackin, Paris and Brussels, 1923, pp. 116-118 ; cf. also Mythologie
Asiatique illustrée, Librairie de France, Paris, 1928 : Mythologie du
Lamajame, by J. Hackin, pp. 158-162).
The Musée Guimet has one very highly interesting thanka on the Kegar
story. It is Buddhistic in at least its out ward affiliation , as it has as its
central figure a picture of the benign Lamaistic: goddess Mthing-gi zal.
brang-ma, an attendant of the fierce Lha -mo ( = Sri-dēvi), carrying. -
ad arrow and a mirror and riding on a mule. A number of episodos
in the Kesar story surround the central figure, among which is one of
Kesar's playing practical jokes with 'Bruguma before their marriage,
and other scenes depict his prowess in many adventures, and his final
beatification in the Buddhist heaven. Kesar is shown always in a white
dress, the long Tibetan gown, and in a plumed cap with four flaps
(cf. Mythologie Asiatique illustrée, op. cit., pp. 158 -160). There might be
other similar pictures, and possibly also bronze and terracotta statuettes
representing the main characters in the story.

xxi 
INTRODUCTION
III. The Story of Kesar according to the Ladakh Recensions.
Don-grub, the third son of the King of Heaven Dbang-po-rgya-bzhin ,
bocame incarnato on earth to rule over the land of Gling. The circum
stances necessitating his birth , and the events connected with it, are
described at length, but these appear to be later additions to the story,
after Kosar had become to some extent eified. Don-grub was born on
earth and became known as Kesar. ( This name is found in Central
Tibet as Gesar, and ainong the Mongols the form of the name is Geser.
In Ladakh, apart from Kesar, tho form Kye-sur also occurs, which is in
Classical Tibetan Skye-gear, meaning Noly-born ' or 'Born again ':
Kesar and Gesar mean in Tibetan ‘anther or pistil of a flower,' and also
* saffron ': in both these senses we have in Sanskrit the word kësara : it
is not known which is the original word--the Sanskrit or the Tibetan,
although Sanskrit kesa 'hair ' in Indo-European. Dr. Franke thought
that the Tibetan name Kesar was derived from the Sanskrit.) Kesar
became perfect in all the arts in his youth , and gave evidence of his
bravery and prowex in a number of adventures.
At that time there was a beautiful miten numed 'Bruguma
('a Bruguma), the daughter of it rich man of Gling. ('Bru-gu-ma means
'a Broken Fragment of Grain '. In t'entral Tihat, the name occurs
as Šes-lcan 'Brug-mo, now pronouncoat Shirhang Duyur. The Mongols
kgow her as Rogmo. A variant of the name found in Ladakh is ’Briguma,
which means “Young Yak Cow ', or Yik Heifer'.) Kenar wanted to
marry 'Bruguma. There was rie:i and powerful rival of Kosar for
'Bruguma's hand, but he was put out of rourt by Kesat with his superior
qualities. Kesalr at first concealed his identity before 'Wriguma and her
people by taking the garb of a 'street-boy'. He teased 'Brugima by
some rude horneplity and practical jokes besitting a primitive society,
and ultimately his « lains to 'Brugma's hard Wtri arcepted by her
parents, and he married 'Bruguma. After that they began to live
together in Gling, and the chiefs of the land of Cling recognised in Kesar
& true hero and made himn king. Sometime after this Besar went to
China, and there he performed some wonderful acts. He married the
daughter of the Emperor of China and returned home with her, and for a
time lived happily with his two wives. (In the Kesar Suga, this second
wife of Kesar, the Chinese Princess, has no further place.)
At the suggestion of the goddess Ane-bkur-dman-mo, Kesar went to
quell the Giant or Devil of the North. This goddess was none other

xxiii
INTRODUCTION
than the Queen of Heaven, the mother of Kesar when he was staying in
heaven &s Don-grub. In the Kesar Saga she is always present, helping
Kegar and saving him whenever he is in danger. Kesar took leave of
his beloved wife 'Bruguma. (There are one or two beautiful lyrics on
this parting of the hero and his wife.) Kegar, after great difficulties,
arrived in the North land. The wife of the giant, whose name was
Dremo-Bamza -bum -skyid , fell in love with Kesar, and through her help
Kesar was able to attack the giant when he was asleep and to kill him .
Dzemo made Kesar take charmed food and drink, and so made him lose
his memory. Forgetting his wife and his land of Gling, Kesar stayed
on with Dzemo. A daughter was born to them
In the meanwhile, during Kesar's absence from home, 'Bruguma
had to suffer from a terrible mishap. The King of the land of Hor,
Gur-dkar, finding that Kesar was absent from his country for a long time,
attacked Gling, and wanted to carry off 'Bruguma. 'Bruguma tried her
bost to save herself, and concealed herself from the invader, but ultimately
she was captured and taken to Hor. Kesar and 'Bruguma bad & son ,
and the King of Hor killed the child . After 'Bruguma had stayed in Hor
for some time, during which she tried to put off her marriage with her
captor, her feelings gradually changed towards the latter -more so as
her husband Kesar was not heard of for such a long time. She had to
marty the King of Hor; and finally she came even to love him .
: Kesar was living with Dzemo, forgetful of everything. Hiis memory
was restored miraculously at the sight of some birds which had brought
tidings of his reverses at home: he remembered his beloved wife and his
home. He vomited out the magic food and drink given to him by Dzemo.
Leaving Dzemo and her daughter, he tried to ride back home to Gling .
At this Dzemo in a frenzy killed her little daughter. Returning home,
Kosar found that another chief had taken possession of his land and castle,
and that his wife was with the King of Hor. He gathered his men and
got his kingdom back, and then went to Hor to punish the abductor and
to bring back his wife.
When in the land of Hor, he took up apprenticeship under a
blacksmith there, and began to watch the King of Hor and 'Bruguma.
Hore he showed his prowess and his magic power in many ways.
Bruguma recognisr.d him , but instead of helping Kesar she supported
Gur-dkar, to whoin in the meanwhile sho had borne two children , a con and
* daughter. Ultimately Kesar, with the help of thn goddess Ane-bkur
dead-Iko , attacked Gur-dkar in his room , ani in spite of his prayers

xxiy INTRODUCTION
killed hina as the goddess directed him . In this way Kesar recovered
his wife and returned with her to Gling. The two children of 'Bruguma
by Gur-dkar were slain by Kesar.
'Brugums, according to the Khalatse version, was made to undergo
ponances and punishments for hor unfaithfulness, and after some years
when she was cleanged from her guilt Kesat took bor back as his wife,
and they lived the rest of their life happily , until, according to the longer
Buddhistic versions, his translation to heaven .
IV . Literary and Cultural importance of the Kesar Saga.
The above is a brief résumé of the Ladakh vorsions of the Kesar
Saga, which undoubtedly form the most primitive recensions of it. The
other versions obtained in Tibet and in Mongolia have a strong Buddhistic
colouring, and they are very elaborato ; and although there are numerous
points of difference in detail, the main outlines of the story aro every
where tho seme-- Kesar's early life, his marriage with 'Bruguma (or
'Brugmo), Kesar's victory over the Giant of the North with the help of
the latter's wife, Kesar's forgetfulness, abduction of 'Bruguma by
Gur-dkar the King of Hor, faithlessness of ' Bruguma to Kesar, and killing
of Gur-dkar and his children by Keser and recovery of 'Bruguma.
The story must be admitted to be great, 
quite epic in its conception ,
And at far with that of the Iliad and of the Odyssey, of the Rāmāyana,
of the Niblung Saga, and with some of the Old Irish tales. As in all epic
and romantic tales, there is plenty of the supernatural in it : but neverthe
losa, the tale has a very great human interest, bocause it is ultimately
de reflex of the lifo of the people among whom it grow up. Human
passions, human sufferings and triumphs are there in plenty ; and the
supernatural accretions have not been able to blur the bold outlines of
the main characters. Kesar has some primitive qualities, in spite of his
innate nobleness worthy of a hero-king who has come to establish &
kingdom of God on earth . Kesar's wife, 'Bruguma, is not an immaculate
heroine: one feels the contrast with such ideal characters 88 Sita,
and Penelope, and Derdriu the wife of Noisi in the Old Irish logend. One
is rather reminded of Helen in the Greek atory, of Gwenhwyfar the wife
of Arthur in the British legend, and to some extent of Gudrun in the
Sigurd Saga; but still, 'Bruguma is very human, and we feel like com .
miserating with her in her sufferings and her weakness, although we
would have liked her to have remained constant to Kesar. Viewed from

INTRODUCTION XXv
all aspects, it can be justly claimed for this Saga that it is highly romantic,
and highly dramatic, and quite a distinctive source of romantic wonder
and romantic pleasure. As such it possesses a literary value of its own.
Moreover, this appears to be the one great epic tale with a consistenoy
of plot and character which originated among the peoples of the
Mongolian race - Tibeto-Chinese, Altaic and Uralic, and American.
The immediato kinemen of the Tibetans--the Chinese, the Thai, the
Burmese, and the other tribes of South China, Burma and Assam - have
not produced any epic story of the magnitude of the Kesar Saga. The
Meithei (Manipuri) story of the lovers, the Princess Thoibi and the
Hero Khamba, is late, and but & slight thing beside the Kobar spio.
The well-known Burmese legend of Maung- Tin-Do (Mon -Tari-Tay)
and his sister Shwe-myat-hna (Rhwe-myak-hna) who are worshipped
as Nats or godlings among the Burmans cannot be compared with
the story of Kesar. Ancient and medieval China produced fine
romances, but no hero tale of national significance. One or two
Thai folk -tales are attractive, but the Thai people, like the Burmese ,
have been captivated by the imagination of India. But the genius
of Tibet in spite of its allegiance to the literature of Buddhism , kept
true to its national hero. The Turka, the Mongols and tho Manchus
have no such hero tale of their own. The Uralic Finns of course have
sbo Kalevala ; but in spite of its great qualities, and its being & repository
of early Finnish life, legend and wisdom , it lacke coberence, it lacks &
well-knit story, and above all, it lacks romance the true romance that
Wo Sasociate with the deathless love between man and woman. The
same may be said of the Esthonian epic Kalevipoeg. The Japanese in
spite of their Kojiki and Nihongi have produced no real epic tale,
although they have some delicately woven romances. The same
thing is to be said of the Koreans. And the members of the Mongol
race in America, even the civilisod Toltece, Aztecs, and Mayas, and
the rest of the Mexico and Yucatan and Central America peoples, and
the Quechuas and Aymaras and other peoples of South America, sro
equally lacking in the matter of a great hero tale. We cannot of course
voriously take Lougfellow's Hiawatha ag a genuine native American
production, the story-part of which moreover of ' Red Indian ' origin
is not in any way epic ' in character.
Like many other great stories, the Kesar story has had its appeal
for other peoples who came to know it. The Mongols and the
Manohus have made it their own. And it penetrated from Ladakh

xxvi
INTRODUCTION
into the State of Hunza -Nagyr, in Kashmir, among the Burushaski
people, from whom a folk -tale version has been recovered (The Buru
shaski Language, by Lt. Col. D . L . R . Lorimer, Institutet for Sammen
lignende Kulturforskining, Oslo, 1935, Vol. II, Texts and Transla
tions, No. IV, pp. 100- 179). It may be that versions in other
languages in tracte contiguous to Tibet may still be forthcoming.
National in origin , it has become an international tale , although within
& restricted area, taking into note the situation of tho Tibetan
people.
P0.
The Kesar Saga thus takes its stand beside the great opic tales of
the world . As such, lovers of literature cannot ignore it: particularly
in its LA Lakhi forms, with their simple style of narration and their
primitive atmosphere.
Moreover, we get from it glimpses of the soul of the Tibetan people
before it was transformed by Buddhism . In spite of the Ladakhi
versions presenting a world rather different from that of the later Bon
religion, these do give us valuable sidelighta, as Francke has shown,
into the pre-Buddhist religion of Tibet. A good deal of primitive
religion and mythology is hidden behind the divine, the demoniac and
the human characters of the Kesar Saga- Although foreign influences
(from the Indian world, from the Iranian and Græco-Roman worlds,
and may be even from the Germanic world ) might have helped it to
Acquire its present form . To find out the bases of the religion and
culture of the primitive Tibeto-Chinese people, the Kesar Saga, specially
in the old Ladakhi form , is sure to furnish valuable material.
From all these aspeots the Sage cannot be neglected by students of
anthropology and sociology, of religiology and of comparative literature.
SUNITI KUMAR CHATTERJI.
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BENGAL,
CALCUTTA,
March I, 1941
(NOTE. — In the Appendices as reprinted in this volume, I'rancke'
system of transliteration of Tibetan is retained without change. This
system uses no letters with diacritical signs, employing «ligraphe (like
ob , zh, ts, dz, ng, ny), and ignores the ḥ (or ") in the middle of words,
and uses the Greek y for a silent g -.]

PREFACE
As far as we can see ai prosent, the first European who makes any
mention of the existence of tho Kesar Saga among Mongolian peoples, is
# German , Peter Simon Pallas, born at Berlin 1741. He heard of it
during his travels in Russian service among the Kalmuks of the Russian
steppes.
Not much later the travellers, B . Bergmann and I. J. Schmidt,
publisbed parts of the legend in German, being translations from the
Mongolian. B . Bergmann's translation is in metrical form and is to
be found in his work Nomadische Streifereien unter den Kalmucken .
" The underlying Kalınuck text appears not to have become known .
I. J. Schmidt translated from a Mongolian edition which had been made
in 1716 at Pokin by command of the emperor Kang-hai. The work bears
the title Die Taten Bogda Gesser-Chan's” . According to Schmidt's
statement, Gogger-Chan stands in high honour among the Chinese, and
the then reigning dynasty (the Manchus) even recognized him as their
tutelary genius. He further says: “ Since Gesser-Chan is named in the
legend as ruler of the three Tibetan tribes of the Tussa, Dongsar, and Lik,
this has given occasion to the Chinese to interweave him in their history
of the threo kingdoms, and to assign him an epoch in their chronology,
being the beginning of the third century."
As long as only the Mongolian version of the Kedar Saga was known,
it had to remain undecided whether the saga be of Mongolian or Tibetan
origin. Nevertheless, Schmidt alredy drew attention to the circumstance
that the theatre for the scenes acted in it is to be found in Tibet.1
The first European, who brought tidings of a Tibetan Gegar Epic, was
Csoma de Körö8, the great investigator of the Tibetan language.2
Thereupon efforts were made to find manuscripts of the opic, and H . A .
Jäschke succeeded in discovering such a one at Byams-pa near Leh in
Ladakh. He had this copied, and the copy was sent to St. Petersburg,
where it still lies. Up to the present day, it seems not to have been
possible to translate this version of the saga.
i Boe Schmidt's translation, Preface, p. IX .
? Grammar of the Tibetan Language, p. 180.
( xxvii

ΑΣviii 
PREFACE
In the meantime, I had noticed in Leh that popular forms of the
Kosar Saga aro at home in Ladakh, and I succeeded in getting one sucb
text written down. 
This text, together with translation and notes, was
then published from Helsingfors.1 Antithetical with I. J. Schmidt's
Glosser-Chan, that is 
entirely written in prose, the composition of the
Kesar Saga in tho Tibetan versions is for the most part metrical. At
least, the speeches are almost always written in verse.
When I was transferred from Leh to Khalatse in Lower Ladakh in
1900 , I found a man in the latter village who was noted for his astonishing
knowledge of the popular Kesar Saga. His name was dron -mchog-bkra
shis-rgya-mthso-pa . (The last throe syllables of his namo had been
added on his marrying into the family of Gya-mthso-pa in Khalatse .)
However, he was a native of Lordo (Lai-rdo), and this village is situated
opposite to a Kyur-bre-can on the Indus in Lower Ladakh . Therofore be
may have brought his version of the saga from Lerdo. Now I closeted
this bard (for the metrical parts of the saga are sung during the rocital)
for several weeks with Ye-shes-rig -'adzin , olerk and schoolmaster at
Khalatse, and in this way gained the Lower Ladakli version of the
Korar Saga, so named by me on its publication in the Bibliotheca Indica,
in the numbers 1134, 1150, 1164, and 1218.
But herewith don-mchog.bkra -shis's material was by no means
exhausted . He continued his story-telling, and related the adventures of
the principal boroes of the saga. Those last sections I published in
J. & P . ASB., under the title, “ The Palading of the Kesar Saga " !.
Through these publications, the question was now opened up, how
tho hitherto unknown literary vorsions of the Kesar Saga and the recently
publishel popular versions wore to be reconciled with each other. Do
they depend upon one another ? Or does cach go its own way indepen
dently of the other ? The first thing necessary was to obtain such
litorary versions. I myself succeeded in buying copies of parts of the
Byams-pa manuscript, i.o. of tho very same work that had beon sont to
St. Petersburg. Copies of the same book, made before that by Dr. Kar!
Marx in Leh , appear to have passed into Dr. B . Laufer's possession .
In addition to the above, I found a manuscript of the IT ang war episode
of the Kesar Saga, in the Museum für Völkerkunde in Berlin ,
1 Mémoires de la Société Finno-ougrionne, No. XV, 1900, 1902.
? Vol. II, 1906, No. 10, pp. 407 ff.; Vol. III. 1907, No . 2, 3, pp. 67 ff. and
Pp. 201 ff.

PREFACE xxix
In consequence of the skilful quest of Mr. J. van Manen, General
Secretary of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, a much greater quantity of
material has been brought to light, and we are astonished on hearing of
what extraordinary volume the literary settings are. Mr. van Manen
writes as follows in his letter of June 23rd , 1925 : " What will be certainly
of interest to you is to hear that I have obtained a very interesting
completo Umod (dbu-med ) mg of the Hor-gling in its written recension,
and also a similar complete copy in Uchen (dbu-can) of the Lho-gling.
The former I have had now copied out in Uchen (dbu -can ) algo.
" They record the wars against, respectively, the Shing-khri rgyal-po,
the Gir-dkar rgyal-po, the Sa -tham rgyal-po, and the Ma-bdud rgyal-po.
“ These four seom not to have been over printed , but exist only in
ms. The two which I have are very bulky. My Uchen (dbru-can) Hor
gling covers 1,300 pagos of 17 lines each , foolscap. The Lho-gling, 1,000
auch pages. The text is mostly metrical. Only the connecting passages
between the glue (songs) are in prose.
" The four works are describod as the a -ma (mother), but there seems
quite a literature grouped around them , described as yan-lag (limbs)."
Although the literary settings of the Kesar Saga are extremely
voluminous, according to these communications, yet there remains
nothing further to be done, than that the scientific world tackle their
translation. The immediate result of such work will mean a due inflation
of the Tibetan dictionaries. But then we may hope to gain clearer
insight into the comparative relations of the various Tibetan versions,
as well as to the versions in Mongolian, Chinese, Turkish, and other
languages.
Let me mention one thing. In his criticism of my " Frühlingsmythus
der Kesarsage," Dr. B . Lanfer said that this oral version of the legend
was to be accepted as the repetition of some or other literary setting of
the saga that a story-teller of fairy-tales had read ; just as in India the
tales from the great epies are repeated for public entertainment by
persons who have read them themselves. Although at the first glance
this explanation seems feasible, yet I have given to consideration that
in Ladakh from one village to another there are deviations in the oral
versions of the saga which are never given in prose, but always in verse,
and that just these verses variate with the villages. Who would believe
that it would occur to a man reciting a literary work in all the villages
to remodel into new verses those he had just been reading in the book,
instead of telling his story in prose ?

XXX PREFACE
No: the more obvious acceptance is that in Ladakh we are in the
home-land of the Kesar Saga, and that here every village feels it has the
right to possess its own version of the Kesar Saga and to hand it on to
posterity. But the importance of such pondoasion comes from the fact
that in this country the mythology, forrning the background of the
Kesar Saga, has not yet quite diod out, but continuos to exist as a kind of
religion. The heroos of the Kesar Saga are in this country still deities
whose festivals are celebrated , and in whose honour songs are sung (the
90-called gling-glu),1
Till now I have published only a fow of those songs. It will be of
value for the study of the Kosar Saga to collect also tho interesting marriago
songs of the Tibetans, ag well as the hymns bung at the spring festival.
All this litorature is full of the mythology of the oral versions of the
Kesar Saga. Whether the same mythology will be found in the back.
ground of the literary forms of the Kosar Saga is a question the answer to
which I shall await with interest.
Just now I mentioned Ladakh as the homo-land of the sagu . That is
perhaps somewliat prematuro ; but it is pormissible to mention what
points to Tibet as tho homoland in goneral, and to Western Tibet in
particular. As Schmidt alroady observeul, tho names of places in tho
saga, as far as cognosciblo, are to bo sought for on Tibetan and not on
Mongolian torritory. In the oral versions, ono district stands out with
spocial distinctness as Holy Land . That is the district around the
sacred Lakes Manasarowar and Rakas Tal, and the sacred mountain
Kailasa situated thero. This sacred circuit originally belonged to the
West Tibotan kingdom with its capital Leh (Sle); and consequently tho
Baga has evidently kept firın footing specially in the Wostorn kingdom .
The ontire Western kingdom is called Khrom -ge-ear-gdan.ma in inscrip .
tions as woll us in folklore. That means "market, Gesar's throne" .
The rulers of Lih , who possessed the country provious to the dynasty
logcended from Langdarma, named themselves the descendants of
Gosar.
The so-called wars of the nagar (actually only bridal expeditions)
are made on countries in the closest proximity of Ladakh or Tibet. Such
1 Company Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, p . 359 ff.- I L ikhi Bon.Po
Hymnal and Ladakhi Songs, Nors. 21 to 30.
2 Compare my publication , Die tihetischen Hochzeitslieder, Folkwang Vorlag.
1923.

PREFACE
 xxxi
warlike expeditions aro undertaken against Hor (Turkestan); Gya -nag
(China); 'altro-yul (compare 'n Gro-shod ," wheat country ' ), a province of
Tibet ; Lho-yul (probably the Tibetan province which is written Lho-be,
Glo-bo, or Blo-bo). As all those countries actually exist, one could readily
believe that the saga contains historic elements. But the study of the
oral versions destroys this belief. Here everything melts into mythology .
However, it is beyond doubt that also many of the other names of places
occurring in the saga are the names of places actually existing that could
probably still be found in the district around the Sacred Lakes.
As far as the name of the hero in the saga is concerned , it occurs in
two different forms, of which the one (K [y]e-sar) is peculiar to the oral
versions from Ladakh, while the other (Ge-ear) is found in the literary
settings. As to the name Ge-sar (= Gesser of the Mongolians) 1.J.Schmidt
says that the Tibetan word Ge-sar means " the pistil of a flower" 1
Jäschke confirms this in his Dictionary. At the same time, the Indian
word Kesara is brought in as comparison, and as a further meaning
" filament" , " anther " is given. So far the word could be of Indian origin ,
and then the form with Gwould not be so primitive as that written with K .
I can remark to this that in Ladakh the Indian name Kesara is specially
used to designate " saffron " and saffron is called King Kesar's flower.
Also Sarat Chandra Das confirms that Gesar is a name for saffron . The
juice of the yellow saffron is, besides, used to decorate the Gesar manu
soripts. I have seen such in which important lines, or entire pages, were
painted over with saffron.
K [y ]e-sar, the form of the verbal versions, has given occasion to a
popular etymology among the Ladakhis that I have formerly alluded to.
According to this, the word Ke-sar is said to have been evolved out of
skye-gaar, " new -born ". However, this name has nothing to do
with the Buddhist doctrine of re-incarnation. It is said to have been
given only in connection with the story of the hero 's birth on earth ,
after his death in heaven . This popular etymology has one particular
Bupport in the fact that in Lower Ladakh the name is actually sometimes
pronounced Kye-sar.
Lastly, Professor Grünwedel's opinion is to be mentioned, viz . that
the name Kesar could be a form of the Latin Caesar = Kaiser. Just as
well as the name of Charlemagne, Karl, has travelled as far as Russia
1 Sohmidt's Introduction, p. IX .
* Sos Frühlingsmythes, p. 29.

XXXi 
PRETACE
(Korol, Krol." king " ), 80 could the word Caesar finally bave been carried
to Tibet.
I personally incline most to the hero-king's name being derived
from the Indian word Kesara, " saffron, or anther " . Kesar is without
doubt a god of spring, and the saffron is one of the earliost spring-flowers.
Besides, Kesar is also a god of generation, and the word Kobara, in its
meaning of “ pistil" or " anther" points to this.
(1925.) A . H . FRANCKE.

PREFACE.
My sincerest thanks are due to the Council of the Asiatic Society for
allowing me to edit for the Bibliotheca lodica a Lower Ladakhi Version
of the Kesar-gaga. The plan of the work is the following:
• Prologue to the Kesar-gaga. Birth of Kesar. Wooing and mar.
ringe to a'Bruguma. Kesar's journey to China and marriage to &
Chinese Princes8. Keanr's journey to the North Capture of a' Bruguma
hy the king of Hor. Kesar's defent of the king of Hor.
Accompanying the Tibetan text will be given a vocabulary of the
pew words and an abstract of contents.
In criticising one of my fornier papers on the Kesar-saga, one of
my critics makes the following remark with reference to the line Saugs
rgyasla btangbai yri zhig ilgos, ' you must have a knife to stah Buddha ':
" if this line occurs at all !" This means no less than suspecting me of
introducing now lines into the saga, simply to soit a certain purpoce of
my own. I must say that it would be very unwise of me to do so. I
could easily be exposed. There is not only a British Joint Cuiss ainsioner
nt Lab, who would find : a great deal with the help of Urdu, as well
ns any of the visitors to Likh, numbering about 50 in a year, but there
is niso a whole staff of missionaries at Leh , some of whom have junt am
critical a mind as any German professor,
What I have to do with regard to the Tibetan text is to correct
orthographical mistaken, if they are due to carelesenega of the writer,
In all doubtful cases I'shall give, as I have always done, the word in
the doubtful spelling nu well ; this refers especially to the names in
this edition I shall not even attempt to reconstruct incomplete verses,
but leave them as I find them .
As regards the value of the oral versions of the Kesar- nya, it is
highly probable that they will be of a similar usefulness for a thorough
understanding of the Keanr-epic, as are the Norse versions of the Nibe.
langen-sega for the understanding of the Nibelungen -epir. With regard
to my former publication of the birth -story of Kesar, I was told that it
was an abridged repetition of the Kesar-epic. This cannot possibly
he said of the present version of the sage, because it is entirely different
from the former. A whole chapter like the - Prologue to the Kesar
magn " does not nppear to occur in the epic at all.*
- Alt the Mongolian version of the Kebar-saga (Schmidt's transitioul) ines not
contain in, bat starts with the birth -story of Kesar

But also of the latter there may erist several recensione. The orni
versions of the Kesar-eaga are interesting alao from another point of
view . They show what the Ladakhis hold of the Kegar-religion at the
present day. For thnt this mythology has not yet ceased to exercise the
power of a religion, is shown most plainly in the marriage ritual and in
the g Ling glu.
The following version of the Keser-saga was dictated slowly by an
inhabitant of Khalatse, who was brought up in Lerdo nenr Tugmarig.
This version is probably the one which is carrent at Lerilo. The name
of the dictator is dkor mchoy b Krashis rgya mthsopa The name of the
writer is Yeshes rig 'adzin , munsli of Khalatse.
A . H . FRANCKE.

5༄༅།། གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་རབས་སྒྲུངས་ཡིན།
ཡོད་ཚུག།
*o. 1.
ཡུལ་ཀཱ་ལ་ཀོལ་ཟེར་བའི་ཡུལ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ཡུལ་པོ་ལ་མི་རྒད་པོ་
ཞིག་དང་རྒདགོ་ཞིག་ཡོདོ་ཚུག། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་གཉེན་འཁོར་མེད་མཁན་
ཡིན་བས] ཞག་ཅིག་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་ས་བྱད་ཡིན་པ་ཞིག་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཐོང་རོས་
ཆུ་ངུན་ཞིག་བཅོས། དེ་ནས་ཡུལ་མི་ཚང་མ་དཔྱིད་ལ་ཞིང་རྨོ་ཐོབསླེབ་སྟེ། ཁོང་
གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་དེ་ཞིང་པོ་ལ་ས་བོན་ཞིག་མེད་པ་ཡིན། གཞན་མ་མི་ཞིག་ནས་བུ་
ལོན་ཟུམ་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས། དེ་ནས་ཚང་མས་ཞིང་རྨོ་ཟ་ན། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀས་ཡང་
དེ་ཞིང་པ་ལ་ས་བོན་བཏབ་སྟེ་རྨོས། དེ་ནས་ཚང་མས་ལྟར་ཆུ་བཏང་ཙ་ན། དེ་ཨ་
གི་ཡདུ་སོང་སྟེ་ཆུ་བཏོངས་པ། དེ་ཚིང་གི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་ལྗང་པ་གཅིག་ཅིག་མེན་པ་
སྐྱེས་དེ་མེད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཨ་བི་ཡ་མཚན་སོང་སྟེ་ཆུ་མ་བཏང་བ། ཁང་བ་རུ་
ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཨ་པོ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ལྦ་ཨ་པོ། ཚང་མའི་ཤིང་དེ་སྔོན་བོ་སོང་
སྙིའདུག། 
ང་ཏང་གི་ཞིང་ཆུ་ངུན་པོ་ལ་ལྗང་པ་གཅིག་ཅིག་མེན་པ་མི་འདུག།
ངས་ཆུ་མ་བཏང་བ་ཡོངས་རས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཨ་པོས་ཟེརས། ལྗང་བ་གཅིག་
ཡོད་ནའང། རང་གི་རྩལ་ཆུ་སྐྱིལ་ཏེ་ཡོང་ ཟེརས་པ། ཡང་ཨ་བི་ལག་སྟེ་

སོང་སྟེ་ཆུ་ཞིག་སྐྱིལ་ཏེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་ཆུ་བཏང་གིན་བོརས་པ་སང༌། སྟོན་
ལ་ཚང་མའི་ཞིང་རྫ་རོན་ཚུག་པ། དེ་ལྗང་པ་གཅིག་ཅིག་པོ་ཆེན་མོ་སོང་སྟེ། ཤིང་
རྒྱལ་ཞིག་ཟམ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་མི་ཚང་མས་ཞིང་རྫ་ཙ་ན། ཨ་པོ་ཡང་སྟ་རི་ཞིག་
ཁར་ནས་སོང་སྟེ། དེ་དྲིམ་གྱི་རྩ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་བདོངས། ལན་གཉིས་གམ་
བརྡུངས་པ་སང། དེའི་ཁ་ཐོག་ནས་གྲོ་ནས་ཁ་ཅིག་འབུད་དེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་
ཨ་པོ་འཐད་གྱིན་ཞིག་ཁང་པ་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཨ་བི་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ལྤ་ཨ་བི།
ང་ཏང་གི་ལྗང་པའི་བུ་དྲ་དེ་ལ་ངས་ བརྡུངས་པ། ཁ་ག་ནས་ནས་ཁ་ཅིག་འབུད་
དེ་ཡོངས་པ། ཕོ་རེན་ཟོད་རེ་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཨ་བི་དང་ཨ་པོ་གཉིས་
ཀ་སོང་སྟེ། ལྗང་པའི་བུ་དྲའི་རྩ་ལ་ཡུལ་ཐོག་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ། དེ་ལ་ངལ་
ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་བདེ་མོ་བཅོས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་པོ་དང་ཨ་བི་གཉིས་ཀས་སྤོ་རེས་ངཏང་
གིན་ཞིག་ལྗང་པའི་དྲིམ་པོ་ལ་བརྡུངས། དེ་ནས་ཁག་ནས་འབྲུ་མང་པོ་ཆེན་མོ་
ཕོ་རོན་ཟམ་རེ་ཆུ་ཡོང་བ་ཚོགས་ལ་བབས། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀས་ཁང་ངུ་ལ་སྐུ་སྟེ་
ནང་མི་ཚང་མ་གང་སོང། ཁང་ངུའི་ནང་དུ་མ་ཤོང་བས། ཞིང་དེ་ཁ་ངང་
བ་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ། དེའི་ནང་དུ་བཏངས།།
No e.
དེ་བང་བ་བཀང་སྟེ། དེ་ཁ་ལ་རྡོ་བ་ཞིག་བཀབ་སྟེ། ཀ་ལག་བཏང་སྟེ་
ཨ་པོ་དང་ཨ་བི་གཉིས་ཀ་ཁང་པ་རུ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཁོང་མང་པོ་འཐད་སོང། དཔྱིད་ཁ་
རུ་མི་ཚང་མས་བང་བ་ནས་ཕིང་ཟ་ན། ཨ་པོ་ཡང་ཕད་ཅིག་ཁར་དེ་བང་བུ་ཕིང་
བ་སོང། ཁོས་བང་བའི་ཁ་རྡོ་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། འབྲུ་ཚང་མ་འབུ་རྩིག་ལ་
གྱུར་ཏེ་བང་ག་གང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུབ།། དེ་ནས་ཨ་པོ་ཡ་མཚན་སོང་སྟེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཁང་

ངུ་ལ་ཨོང་སྟེ་ཨ་བི་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཝ་ཨ་བི། ང་ཏངགི་བང་བའི་ནས་ཚང་མ་
འབུ་རྩིག་ལ་གྱུར་ཏེ་འབུ་རྩིག་དང་བང་བ་གང་སོང་སྟེ་འདག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་
པོ་དང་ཨ་བི་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཚེར ཀ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། ཁང་ངུའི་ནང་དུ་ཡོད་
མཁན་གྱི་ནས་པོ་ཟ་ཚར་འདུག། ད་ཅི་བསོ་ཡིན་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་འདུགས། ཞིག་
བདུན་སོང་བ་དང། ཁོང་བདེན་མ་ཆེས་པར་ཨ་བོ་ཡང་བལྟ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། བང་
བའི་ཁ་ཕྱེས་ཏེ་བལྟས་པ། འབུ་རྩིག་གཅིག་དང་ཅིག་གིས་བཟོས་ཏེ། འབུ་
རྩིག་ཆེན་མོ་གཅིག་ལ་གྱུར་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཨ་པོས་ཁ་རྡོ་དེ་བཀབ་སྟེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཨ་
གི་ལ་ཟེར་བ་ལ་ཁང་པ་རུ་ཡོངས། ལྤ་ཨ་བི། བང་བའི་ནང་གི་འབུ་རྩིག་ཚང་
མ་ཚར་ཏེ་འབུ་ཆེན་མོ་གཅིག་ལ་གྱུར་ཏེ་འདུག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཞག་བདུན་
སོང་སྟེ། ཡང་ཨ་པོ་བལྟ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་ཁ་ཕྱེས་ཏེ་བལྟས་པ་སང། འབྱ་རྩིག་
བོ་ཕྲུ་གུ་བདེ་མོ་ཞིག་ལ་གྱུར་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཉི་མ་ལ་བཏང་ན་ཞུ་ཅེས། གྲིབ་
འཛུགས་ལ་བོར་ན་འཁུངས་ཅེས། གསེར་རི་ཚུན་ཆུན་པོ་བྲང་འཁོར་ལ། དངུལ་
ལི་ཅོདི་སྐྱེད་འཁོར་ལ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཨ་པོསཾ་ཁ་རྡོ་མགྱོགས་
བ་བཀབཀབ་སྟེ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྟེ་ཁང་ངུ་ལ་ཡོང་སྡེ་ཨ་བི་ལ། ཝ་ཨ་བི། དེ་བང་
བའི་ནང་ན་ཕྲུ་གུ་མི་འདྲ་ཅེས་བདེ་མོ་ཞིག་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བི་འཐད་དེ།
ཝ་ཨ་པོ། ང་དང་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་བལྟ་མཁན་ཅིག་རག། རྒྱལ་ལ་སོང། ང་དང་
ལ་ཕྲུ་གུ་མེད་ཟེརས། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་མགྱོགས་པ་སོང་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། བདེན་
པ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་ག་ཁང་ངུ་ལ་ཁར་ཏེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། དྲི་དོན་ཕོག་དོན་བཏང་
སྡེ་དཀོན་མཆོག་ལ་མང་པོ་བཅོལ་ནས། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་མང་པོ་འཐད་གྱིན།
འདུགས།

No. %.
ཞག་བདུན་སོང་སྟེ་ གུ་ལ་མིང་བཏོག་ཅེས་མི་ཡི་ལ། ཨ་བོ་གྲང་ང་ལུཛ་
པའི་ནང་དུ་མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དག་ལ་ཞུ་བ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། མེ་མེའི་དགོན་པའི་རྩར་
སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་ཧངས། །
མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་ཨ་པོ་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་གསན་མོ།
སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགས་འང་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ་
ཨ་པོ་ང་རང་ལ་ཚ་བོ་ཞིག་ཐོབ་ལོ།
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ང་རང་ལ་བུ་ཚ་ཞིག་འབྱོར་ལོ།
ངའི་ཚ་བོ་ལ་མིང་ཞིག་སྩལ་ལོ།
ངའི་བུ་ཚ་ལ་མིང་ཞིག་སྩལ་ལོ།
ཨ་བོས་མེ་མེ་ལ་དེ་ལྕག་ཞུས་པ་སང། མེ་མེ་སློབ་དབོན་རྩེ་
དགུས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར །
གླིང་གི་ཨ་པོས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
གླིང་གི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་པའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་།
ཨ་པོ་རང་ལ་བུ་ཞིག་འབྱོར་ཏེ་ཡོད་ན།
བཀྲ་ཤིས་རང་ལ་ཚ་བོ་ཐོབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ན།
བླ་མ་ང་ཡིས་མིང་ཞིག་བདག་ཡིན།
སློབ་དཔོན་ང་ཡིས་མིང་ཞིག་བདག་ཡིན།
བུ་ཚ་དེའི་མིང་ལ་དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་ཏོག།
ཚ་བོ་དེའི་མིང་ལ་དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་དོག །

No. 4.
མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་པ་སང། ཨ་པོ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྟེ་རང་གི་ཁང་
དུ་ལ་ཡོངས། ཁྱིམ་མཆོས་པ་ལ་ཁྱི་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ཁྱི་ལ་ཁྱི་ཕྲུག་གཉིས་
སྐྱེ་ནི་ཡོད་པས། དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོས་དེ་ཁྱི་ཕྲུག་གཉིས་ཀ་གསོ་སྡེ་
ལིངས་ཁྱི་བཅོ་ལྕི་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོས་དེ་ཁྱི་ཁྲིད་དེ་ཞག་དང་ལིངས་ལསོང་སྟེ།
སྦྱིན་དང་བོང་མང་པོ་ཁྱུང་སྟེ། ག་པོ་དང་ཨ་བི་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཤ་མང་པོ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་
བཏངས། ཞག་ཅིག་ཁྱིགཉིས་ཀ་སྔན་ལ་འབུད་དེ་སོང། དོང་གསུམ་མི་འབ
སྔོན་མོས་ཁྱིའི་རྗེས་བོ་བཅད་དེ་སོང་པ་སང། གླང་རི་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་སོང།
བསླེབ་བ། མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་དགུ་འདུག་སའི་མཚམས་ཀྱི་ལྕགལ་བྲག་
ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་བྲག་གི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་ཁྱི་གཉིས་ཀས། སྲིན་པོ་མགོ་
དགཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐར་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་དེར་བསླེབ་
སོང། སྲིན་པོ་དེས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟརབཏུངས།
ཀྱེ་མ་གསན་དང་ཨ་ཅོ་ལེ།
ཀྱི་མ་གསན་དང་ལིངས་མི་ལེ།
ཨ་ཚོབའི་ཁྱིས་ང་སྐར་ཏེ་ཡོད།
ལིངས་བའི་ཁྱིས་ང་བཀག་སྟེ་ཡོད།
ང་མ་བསད་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་དམག་གཡོག་བཅོ་ཡིན།
ང་མ་བསད་ན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ལིངས་གཡོག་བཅོ་ཡིན།
ང་མ་བསད་ན་ཉིད་ལ་ཕན་ཐོགས་ཤིག་ཡོང་ཡིན །!

No 5.
སྲིན་པོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོས་བསད་
ཅེས་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཤེས། ཕུད་ཉེས་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཤེས་པར། མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་
རྩེ་དགུ་ལ་ཞུ་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།།
ངའི་མ་མེས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
ཨ་ཡི་བྲག་བངས་པོའི་ནང་ན་སྲིན་པོ་མགོ་དགུ་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
བྲག་བངས་པོའི་ནང་ན་ངའི་ལིངས་ཁྱིས་བཀགས་ཏེ་འདུག་ལོ
དེ་སྲིན་པོ་བསད་ད་ཕུད་དེ་རིག་བདུང་ལོ།
དེ་མགོ་དགུ་བསད་ད་ཕུད་དེ་རིག་བཏང་ལོ།
དང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཞུས་པ། མེ་མེས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།
གླིངས་ཀྱི་ཕྲུ་གུས་འང་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང་།
དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོས་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་།
དེ་སྲིན་པོ་དེ་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་བསད་པ་རིག་དགོས་སུག།
དེ་མགོ་དག་དེ་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་བསད་པ་རིག་དགོས་ཐུག།
དེ་ཀུན་བསད་དེ་ཁྱེ་རང་ཕྱི་ལོག་ལ་ཞོན་པ་རིག་དགོས།
ཕི་ལོག་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་ངདབ་དགོས།
སྙིང་གི་མཐིལ་ནས་དཀོན་མཆོག་ལ་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་ཏོབ་ལོ།
སྲིན་པོའི་མགོ་བཞི་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་རྩིག་ལྡན་པོ་ལྡན་ཆེན།

སྲིན་པོའི་མགོ་བཞི་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགའི་གྲུ་བཞི་ལྡན་ཆེན།
སྲིན་པོའི་མགོ་གཅིག་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུའི་སསྐང་ལྡན་ཆེན།
སྲིན་པོའི་རྐང་པ་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུའི་མ་གདུང་ལྡན་རྟེན།
སྲིན་པོའི་ལག་པ་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
གླིང་གི་བུ་གདུང་ལྡན་ཆེན།
ཕྲན་མོ་བཅད་དེའཕང་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་གྲལ་ཆད་ལྡན་ཆེན།
སྲིན་པོའི་རྩིབ་མ་བཅགས་ཏེ་འཕང་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་ཐོག་ཀྲབ་ལྡན་ཆེན།
སྲིན་པོའི་ནང་ཆ་ཕིང་སྡེ་འཕང་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་ཕེ་མར་རི་ཐོག་ས་ལྡན་ཆེན།
གློ་བ་དེ་ཕིང་སྡེ་འཕང་ན།
གསེར་པོའི་གསེར་རི་ལྡན་ཆེན།
སྙིང་པོ་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
དཀར་པོའི་དངུལ་རི་ལྡན་ཆེན།
གྲོད་པ་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
གྲོ་མ་ཐང་གི་ཐང་འགོ་ལྡན་ཆེན།

རྒྱུ་མ་བདདེ་འཕང་ན།
རྒྱུ་མ་རོང་གི་རོང་འགོ་ལྡན་ཆེན།
ཆེའི་ཕོ་བ་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
སྤོ་མཐོ་ནང་བའི་ལིངས་ས་ལྡན་ཆེན།
སྲིན་པོའི་མིག་གཉིས་ཀ་ཕིང་ལྕེ་འཕང་ན།
ཆུ་མིག་ཚང་ཡ་ལྡན་ཆེན།
སྣ་ཁང་གཉིས་ཀ་བཅད་དེ་འཕུང་ན།
སྐད་སྙན་གླིང་བུ་ལྡན་ཆེན།
མཁལ་མ་གཉིས་ཀ་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་ན།
རྒྱབ་རྟེན་ཕོ་ལོང་ལྡན་ཆེན།
*༠. 6.
དེ་ཚང་མ་བཅད་དེ་འཕང་འཕང་ཚུག་པ་ཞག་བདུན་སོང་། ཞག་བདུན་པ་
ལ་ཁྱོ་དང་མི་ཚང་ཀ་ལྟོགས་སིན་ཞིག་དང་ཁང་པ་རུ་བསླེབ། ཁོང་བསླེབ་བསླེབ་
ཚུག་པ་ཨ་པོ་དང་ཨ་བི་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཚེར་ཀ་ཆེན་མོ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་གུ་བསླེབ་
བདང་ཁོང་འཐད། ཨ་པོས་ཁོ་ལ་བག་མ་མ་ཁྱོངས་པ་སང། ཁོ་སྲ་བཅོ་སྟེ་
རི་ལ་སོང་། ཞག་དེ་ཟམ་ཞིག་འདགས་མཁན་ཡིན་ནོགོ་ཟེར་ཏེ། མ་པོ་མེ་མེ་
སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགུ་ལ་ཞུ་བ་ལ་སོང། མེ་མེའི་སྒོ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།
མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགུ་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་།
པའི་བུ་ཚ་ལ་མནའ་མ་ཞིག་འདྲི་བར་རན་ལོ །

དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་ལ་བག་མ་འདྲི་རན།
ཁོ་ལ་མཛེས་པའི་མནའ་མ་ཞིག་ག་ན་འདུག་གཟིགས་འང།
དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་ལ་བག་མ་ག་ན་འདོག་གཟིགས་འང།
མོ་དཔེ་ཕིང་སྟེ་མོ་ཞིག་ཏོབ་ལོ།
རྩིས་དཔེ་བཏིང་སྟེ་རྩིས་ཤིག་སྐོར་ལ།
ཤར་ན་འདུག་ག་ནུབ་ན་འདུག་གཟིགས་འང།
བྱང་ན་འདུག་ག་ལྷོ་ན་འདུག་གཟིགས་འང།
དེ་ཟུག་ཞུས་པ་སང། མི་ཆེ་སིས་གཏམ་ལན་ལ་ཨི་ཟུག་གླ་བཏངས།
གླིང་གི་ཨ་པོས་འང་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཨ་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་འང་པའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཁྱེདཀྱི་ཚ་བོ་ལ་མནའ་མ་ཞིག་འདྲིན། །
དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་ལ་བག་མ་ཞིག་འདྲི་ན།
ཡུལ་གྱི་སྲང་ཕྱོགས་ཤིག་ནས་ལུག་ལོ་མ་བཙོབརྒྱད་ཁྱུང་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་པོ་ལག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཨ་བི་ལ་དེ་གནས་ཚུལ་ཚང་མ་ཟེརས་ཏེ། ཨ་
པོ་དང་ ཨ་བི་གཉིས་ཀས་སྲང་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ནས་ལུག་ལོ་མ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་མི་ཐོབ་
ཟེར་ནས། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀས་གྲབས་ཤིག་བཅོ་སྟེ། ང་ཏང་ང་ཚ་བོ་ལ་བང་རི་
ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན། དེ་ནས་མི་མང་པོ་ཞིག་འཛོམ་ན། དེའི་ནང་ནས་ལུག་ལོ་མ་
བཅོ་བརྒྱད་བིང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀས་བང་རི་ཞིག་བཏིངས། ཡུལ་
མོ་གཉིས་ལ་ཧན་བཏང་སྟེ། ཨ་པོ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལ་དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་ཟེར་
མཁན་ནི་ཚ་བོ་ཞིག་འབྱོར་བས། ཁོ་ལ་བང་རི་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་བཏང་ཆེན། དེའི་

10
ཕི་ལ་ཚང་མ་ལྡན་མོ་ལ་ཡོང་དགོས་ཟེར་ཏེ་བོས་མཁན་མི་ཞིག་བཏངས། ཡུལ་
གཉིས་ཀྱི་བུ་ཚ་དང་བུ་མོ་ཚང་མ་ཡོང་ཟ་ན། ཨ་པོ་ཁོ་རང་གི་སྒོ་ལ་འདག་སྟེ །
བུ་མོ་ཚང་མ་ལ་འདྲི་སྡེ་ལུག་ལོ་མ་སུ་སུ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ལུག་ལོ་མ་ཡིན་མཁན་
ཚང་མའི་མིང་འབྲི་འིན་ཞིག་ནང་མིག་སོ་སོ་ཞིག་ལ་བོར་སོང། དེ་ནས་དང་
གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་ཡང་དེ་ནང་མིག་གི་ནང་དུ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ། འདི་བུ་མོ་ཚང་མ་ཁྱེ་
རང་ལ་བག་མ་ཁྱོངས་པ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁོ་ཡང་ཁོང་སག་དང་མཉམ་པོ་བར་སོང།
No. 7.
དེ་ནས་དེ་བུ་མོ་ཚང་མ་ལ། དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་མཐོང་བ་ཟམ་ཞིག་
ལ་སྐུ་ཅེས་འཁར་སོང་བས། ཟླ་དགུ་དངོས་བཅུ་འི་ཞག་ལ་སྔོན་ལ་རང་རིགས་
ངན་ར་པོའི་མགོ་འཁུར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་པ་སང། དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་དེ།
མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགའི་རྩར་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་མིང་བཏག་པར་སོང། མེ་མེ་འི་སྒོ་ལ་
གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།
མ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་ནིས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགས་འང་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་ལ་རིགས་ངན་ར་པོའི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་ལོ།
དང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོ་ལ་ར་མགོ་འཁར་པ་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་ལོ།
དེ་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་མིང་ཞིག་རང་དགོ་ལོ།
དེ་བུ་ཚ་ལ་མིང་ཞིག་རང་དོག་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགུས་གདམ་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བསླངས།
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོས་འང་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང་ལེ།

11
དོང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོས་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་ལོ །
ཁྱེད་ལ་བུ་ཚ་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་ལོ་ཟེར་ན་ལེ།
ར་པོའི་མགོ་འཁར་བ་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་ཟེར་ན།
ལྟས་ངན་ཡང་དུ་རྒྱུར་ཏེ་པ་སང་ལྡན་རྭ་སྐྱེས་ཏོག།
དེ་ནས་ཁོ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྟེ་ཁང་པ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ། ཡང་བུ་མོ་ཞིག་ལ་ལངས་
པོའི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོ་ཡང་གྲང་ང་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་
མེ་མེ་འི་རྩར་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
མེ་མེ་སློབ་དཔོན་ནིས་ང་འི་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགས་འང་ངའི་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་ཁང་པ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་དང་ཕྲུ་ག་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་འདུག།
རིགས་ངན་ལུངས་པོའི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་ལོ།
རིགས་ངན་ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་ལ་མིང་ཞིག་རང་སྩལ་ལོ།
ལུངས་པོ་འཁུར་མཁན་དེ་ལ་མིང་ཞིག་རང་སྩལ་ལོ།
མེ་མེས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བསླངས་སོ།
གླིང་གི་དཔ་བོས་འང་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
དང་གསུམ་མི་ལ་སྔོན་མོས་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན།
རིགས་ངན་ལྕངས་པོའི་མགོ་འཁུར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་ན།
རིགས་ངན་ཡང་དུ་སྒྱུར་ཏེ་ཨང་གར་ལྕངས་པ་དོགོ།
དེ་ནས་མེམེ་སིས་ཁོ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། །བྱེ་རང་གི་ཨ་ནེ་ཚང་མ་ལ་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་
བོ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་འདི་རིང་སྐྱེ་ཆེན། ཁྲེ་རིང་འདིར་མིང་བདག་ཅེས་ལ་མ་ཡོང་།

12
ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་ཕྲུ་གུ་སྐྱེ་མེས་ཅན་ཚང་མ་ལ་མིང་ངས་བཏགས་ཏེ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཡི་
གེ་གསལ་པོ་བྲི་སྟེ་ཁོ་ལ་བཏངས། ཡི་གེ་ནང་དུ་ཨི་ཟུག་བྲིས་ཡོད་།
སྐྲ་དང་སྨང་ར་དཀར་པོ་ཡོད་མཁ་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་མེན།
དེ་ལ་ཁ་རྒན་དགའ་ནི་བདག་དགོས།
ཁྲའི་མགོ་འཁུར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁྲ་ཐུང་བདག་དགོས།
ཤིང་སྐུའི་མགོ་འར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་སྐྱ་བ་རྒོད་པོ་བཏག་དགོས།
ཟླ་བའི་མགོ་འཁུར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་ཟླ་བ་བཟང་པོ་བཏུག་དགོས།
མདའི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་མདའ་དཔོན་གོང་མ་བདག་དགོས།
ཨ་ལའི་མགོ་འཁུར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐུ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་ཨ་ལ་རོང་གོལ་བརྟག་དགོས།
འབུའི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་བཏག་དགོས།
ཤེལ་ལ་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་ཤེལ་ལི་བུ་ཞུང་བརྟག་དགོས།
གོན་ས་སི་གོང་བ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་མེན།
དེ་ལ་དགའ་ནི་གོང་བ་བཏག་དགོས།

13
ལག་པ་རིང་མོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་ལག་ལག་རིངས་བཏག་དགོས།
རྐང་པ་རིང་མོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལརྐང་རྐང་རིངས་བཏོག་དགོས།
བོང་བུའི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་མེན།
དེ་ལ་བོང་ནག་ལུམ་བུ་བཏག་དགོས།
མིའི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་བཀའ་བློན་ལྡན་པ་བདག་དགོས།
མི་རྒན་གྱི་མགོ་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་མེན།
དེ་ལ་དཔལ་ལ་རྒོད་པོ་བདག་དགོས།
གཡུའི་རངས་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་རྣ་གཡུ་རྣ་རྩལ་བཏག་དགོས།
དུང་གི་རངས་འཁར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན།
དེ་ལ་ཟླ་བ་དཀར་པོ་བཏག་དགོས།
No. 8.
དེ་ནས་ཁོས་དེ་ཡི་གེ་ཁར་དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཁང་པ་ལ་ཡོངས། དེ་ཡི་གེ་ནང་ལྟར་
ཞག་གཅིག་གི་ནང་དུ་ཕྲ་ག་ཚང་མ་སྐྱེས། དེ་ནས་མེ་མེས་བསླབས་མཁན་ནང་
ལྟར་མིང་ཡང་ཚང་མ་ལ་བཏགས། ཕྲུ་ག་སྐྱེའི་ཚོར་དང་ཕི་སྟ་རུ་བིང་སྟེ་སོང་སྟེ།
རང་རང་གིས་ཁང་པ་རེ་རྩིགས་སོང། དེ་ཨ་མ་ཚང་མ་ཡང་དེར་མ་འདུག་པར།
རང་རང་གི་ཁང་པར་སོང། དེ་ཕྲུ་གུ་ཚང་མས རང་རང་གིས་མ་ནེ་རེ་རེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ།

ཁོང་ལ་ནོར་ར་མེད་པའི་པི་ལ ། ཁོང་ཚང་ཀས་གྲབས་བཅོས། པ་ཆི་དཔལ་
དོང་མཁར་ལ་ནོར་ཡོད་ཟེར་འདུག། དེ་ནས་ང་ཏང་ཚང་མ་མཁར་བཅག་སྟེ་
ནོར་འཁྱོང་བར་ཆེན་ཟེར་ཏེ་སོང། དེའི་ནང་ན་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་ཟེར་མཁན་པོ་
ཁོའི་ཨ་མ་བོ་མགར་མོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་པས། གྲིབ་ཕོག་སྟེ་འགྲལ་མ་ཐུབ་པར།
གྲང་ང་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་མེ་མེ་བསློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགའི་རྩར་ཁྲོས་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག་
ཡོད་ཡིན། ཞག་ཅིག་ཁོ་ཨང་པ་ཆི་དཔལ་དོང་མཁར་ལ་ནོར་འཁྱོང་བར་ཆེན་
བསམ་སྟེ། རྡ་ཞིག་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་སོང་བར། ཆུ་ཆེན་མོཞིག་གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ།
དེ་རུ་ལྔ་ཅོ་ཞིག་ཆུ་ནས་མ་ཐར་བ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ལྔ་སོས། ལྔ་ཨ་ཙོང་ཡང་
རྡོམ་ཕོངས་ལ་བཏང་ན། ངས་ཕན་ཐོགས་ཤིག་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་
ང་ལ་ཕན་ཐོགས་ཤིག་བཅོ་ན་ཡོང་ཟེར་ཏེ། རྣམ་ཕོངས་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་འཁྱེརས།
དེ་ནས་ལྔ་སོས་ལམ་བསྟན་དེ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ། པ་ཆི་དཔལ་དང་ན་ཁར་ལ་དཔལ་ལེ་
རྒོད་པོ་སྔན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང། གཞན་མ་ཚང་མ་ཅིའི་ཕི་ལ་མ་བསླེབ་ཟེར་ན།
ལམ་རྩོག་པོ་ཚོར་མང་གི་ཚོགས་ དང་ལྕང་མའི་ཚོགས་མང་པོའི་ནང་ ནས་ཐར་
ཅེས་མེད་ཚུག། དེ་ཚོགས་པོ་བཅད་དིན་སོང་སྟེ་། ཞག་རེ་རེ་ལ་ཐག་པ་གང་
རེ་མེན་པ་ལམ་མ་བིང་བར། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་འགོར་སོང། དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་ལྔ་རྩེ་
དང་མཉམ་པོ་སོང་པ་དེ་རུ་བསླེབ། དེ་ཡུལ་གྱི་མཇུག་ལཨ་ཕི་རྒད་མོ་ཞིག་
ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོ་དེརུ་བྲང་ས་ལ་འདུགས།།
W༠. 。.
དེ་ནས་ཞག་ཁ་ཅིག་སོང་སྟེ་ཁོས་ཨ་ཕི་ལ་ཁ་ཚོད་བཅད་དེ་འདྲིས་པ། ཨ་
ཕི་ལེ། འདི་མཁར་གྱི་ནང་དུ་ནོར་བུ་ནི་རེ་ཡོད་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་ཕས་ལན་དུ་ཝ་

15
བུ་ཚ། ངས་ཚོར་མཁན་ཚང་མ་ཁྱི་རང་ལ་བཤད་ཡིན་ཟེར་དེ་ཟེརས། གླིང་
ཡུལ་ལ་ཡབས་གོན་པ་དང་ཡུམ་ སྔོན་མོ་ཟེར་མཁན་གཉིས་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲི་ག་མ་
ཟེར་མཁན་ཞིག་བལྟམ་ཆེན་ཟེར་འདག། དེ་ནས་གླིང་མཁརགྱི་སྟོད་ལཨ་པོ་
ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚོད། དེ་ཨ་པོ་མགར་བ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཚོད་རག། ཁོ་ལ་བུ་མོ་གསུམ་སྐྱེ་
ཆེན་ཟེར་འདག། བུ་མོ་གཅིག་གི་མིང་ལ་དཀར་ཐིག་མོ་བདག་ཆེན་ལོ། བུ་མོ་
གཅིག་ལ་ནག་ཐིག་མ་བཏོག་ཆེན་ལོ། བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ལ་མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་བདག་
ཆེན་ལོ། དེ་ནས་སྟང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་བཞིན་ལ་བུ་ཚ་གསུམ་སྐྱེ་
ཆེན་ལོ། བུ་ཚ་ཨ་ཇོའི་མིང་ལ་དོན་ལྡན་ཞུ་ཡིན་ལོ ། བུ་བར་པ་ལ་དོན་ཡོད་ལྟ་
ཡིན་ལ། ཆུང་ངུན་པོ་ལ་དོན་གྲུབ་དཀར་པོ་ཞུ་ཆེན་ལོ། དེ་ཆུང་སྟགས་པོ་གླིང་
མགོ་མེད་ལ་མགོ་ལ་འགྱུར་ཆེན་ལོ། དེ་བོ་ག་ཟུག་ལ་འགྱུར་ཡིན་ཟེར་ན། བུ་དོན་
གྲུབ་དཀར་པོ་སྟང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ནས་ཚེ་ཕོས་བཏང་ཆེན་ཟེར་འདུག། ཚེ་ཕོས་པ་སང།
དེ་མགར་ར་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀྱི་བུ་མོ་མ་གོག་ བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་ བལྷམ་ ཆེན་ཟེར་འདུག།
བྱ་ཁ་ཡུག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ། བྱ་འོང་ལྔ་རེ་སྐྱེ་ཆེན་ཟེར་འདག། བྱ་འོང་ལྡེ་རེ་ལ།
བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་སྐྱེ་ཆེན་ཟེར་འདུག། བྱ་ཉི་མཁྱུང་རུང་གི་གཟུགས་པོའི་ཁ་ནེར་
བུ་སྣ་དགུ་ཡོད་ལོ། བྱ་དེ་སྲིན་པོའི་སྐྱེ་བ་ཡིན་ལོ། ཁོས་གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་
བཏུལ་ཅེས་ཡིན་ཟེར་འདུག། ཀེ་སར་སྐྱེ་སྐྱེ་ཚུག་པ་ནམ་མཁའི་ཟླ་བ་དང་ཉི་མའི་
ཟུར་ལ་མཚམས་བཅད་བཏང་སྟེ་འདུག་ཆེན་ལོ། ཁོའི་ནོ་དེ་བྱ་སོ་མིག་དམར་
ཟེར་མཁན་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཆེན་ལོ། ཁོ་བྲག་མཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་ལ་གེ་སར་སྐྱེ་མིནགྱི་ཁ་བར་
ཉན་ཅེས་ལ་བོར་ཆེན་ལོ། དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཚར་དེ། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེས་ཡང་འདྲིས་པ།
དེ་ཚང་མ་ད་ཚོར་བ། ཨ་ཕི་ལེ་། འདུ་པ་ཆི་དཔལ་དང་མཁར་ནང་དུ་ནོར་བུའི་

16
རིགས་ཅི་རེ་ཡོད་ཟེར་ཏེ་འདྲིས་པས། ཨ་ཕིས་ལན་ལ། ཆ་ལག་གི་ནོར་བུ་དེག་
ཁ་དམར་དང་ཟངས་བུ་ཁ་ཡོན། ཙཱ་རི་ཟླ་བ་དཀར་བོ་ཡིན། གབ་རྒྱ་སྟག་ཁྲུ་
བོ་ཡིན། སྣེ་མོ་དཀར་མོའི་སྟོངཤོང་ཡིན། རྡོའི་འགོ་ན་གོད་མ་ཚ་ལངས་ཡིན།
བགླང་གི་འགོ་ན་མཚོ་མོ་རུ་ཡོན་ཡིན། ར་མའི་འགོ་ན་ར་དཀར་མོ་ཡིན། ལུག་
གི་འགོ་ན་ལུག་དྲོ་མོ་ཡིན། བོང་བུའི་འགོ་ན་ནག་པོ་ཁ་དཀར་ཡིན༔ ཁྱིའི་འགོ་ན་
ཁྱི་མོ་དཀར་མོ་ཡིན། བྱི་ལའི་འགོ་ན་བི་ལ་ནག་མོ་ཡིན། རྡོ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་བར་
ཡིན༑ ཕོ་ལད་དི་གཞུ་མོ་ཡིན། གསེར་རི་སྐེད་བུ་ཡིན། དངུལ་གྱི་སྐྱིད་བུ་
ཡིན། དང་ཇི་ལུ་གུ་ཡིན། ཟངས་ཀྱི་ཁྱི་གུ་ཡིན། ཅུ་རུའི་ལག་བ་ཡིན།
མུ་ཏིག་གི་གྲྭ་བ་ཡིན། གཡུའི་ཆོག་བུ་ཡིན། དེ་ཚང་མ་ནོར་བུ་ཡིན་ཟེར་དེ་
ཨ་ཡིས་བསླབས། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་དེ་མཁར་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་ཨ་ཕིས་བསླབ་
ཁོ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླིང་དཀར་གྱི་མཁར་ལ་གཏེར་
ཁན་ཚང་མ་ཁར་ཏེ། 
ཆོད་བཙོ་སྡེ་བོརས། དེ་ནས་པ་ཆི་དཔལ་དང་མཁར་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་སོང་སྟེ་
ཞག་བདུན་སོང་བ་དང། སྔོན་ལ་སོང་མཁན་གྱི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་དཔལ་དོངམཁར་
ལ་བསླེབ། ནོར་བུའི་རིགས་ཚང་མ་དཔལ་ལེས་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་མེད་པས། ཁོང་ཚང་
ཀས་གསེར་རེ་དང་དངུལ་རེ་ཡང་ ཐངས་ རོ་རེ་ཁར་དེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ།
རང་རང་གི་ཁང་པ་རུ་སོང་། པ་ཆི་དཔལ་དང་མཁར་ནོར་ཚང་མ་འཁྱེརས་པ་
སང། བཞིག་སོང་ནས། ཅི་ཡང་མ་ལུས་སོང།།

PROLOQUE TO THE KEBAB-SAGA.
Abstract of Contents.
1. In the land Kalakol there lived the fors-father b Krashis shis and
bis wife. ) They made a little field, borrowed some seed from another
man and sowed it. There only grew a single plant, which they watered
well, until it became a tree. From this tree (perhaps the later tree of
the world ) they received a rich hairest of wheat and barley, each grain
being of the size of a pigeon. Tliea they built a barn and stored it up.
2. One day in spring, wlien the fore- father went to look after the
graio, he found that all the grain had torned into worms. Then these
wormsate up one another ; until only one hoge worm was left, who alone
filled the barn. After seven days, when the fore-father went to see the
worm , it had become a very beautifal child, so tender, that it placed in
the ann, it would melt; if placed in the shade, it would freeze. It had
golden locks falling from the fore-head down to the breast, and a silver
pig-tail falling down to the waist,
3. The fore-father went to the teacher r Tse dgu, who lived in a
hermitage in the cold valley," to ask what name onght to be given to
the child ; and the teacher told him to call the child Dong y&um mila
engonmo.
4. The boy Dong ysum mila sngonmo loved to go a-banting with two
dogs. Once these dogs seized (arreated) an ogre with nine heads on the
rock above the hermitage. The ogre implored the boy not to kill him
and promised to be his helper in war and sport. The boy, who did not
know what to do, went to ask tlie teacher about it.
5. The teacher told him that it was necessary to kill the ogre, and
that ont of his body the land g Ling would come into existence : Out of
four of his heads the four walls of the g Ling-castle, out of four other
ones the foar corners (towers) of the g Ling-castle, out of one of the
heads the floor of the castle, oat of liis legs the large beans, out of his
arms the smaller beams; the fingers would become the sticks of the
roof, the ribs the twigs of the roof, and the interior parte the earth of
tbe roof. The lungs would become the golden gold-hill, and the heart
• This bkrashis is probably identioal with the forefathersmith bkrashis,
montioned in No. 9.
8

18
the white silver-hill. The stomach would become the Groma-plain, the
principal of all plaids, and the bowels the rGyuma-gorge, the principal
of all gorges. The little stomach would be turned into the hunting
ground Spotho nangma, and the eyes into the spring Thsangya ; out of
his nose would arise the [place] Skad snyan glingbu, and out of the kid
neys the rock · Gyab rten .*
6. Before all this wap finished seven days elapsod, and on the
seventh day Dong reum wila sngonmo and his dogs came back hungry to
the fore- father and his wife. The latter had been feariug that the voy
bad stayed away for such a long time, because he was angry with them
for not yet having given him a bride. For this rouson the fore-father
went to the teacher and asked him to cast lots and find out from which
of the foar directions the bride would como. The teacher adviged him
to call together eighteen girls from the street, and to see that all of
them bad been born in the sheep-year. On the occasion of the Bangri
festival, when many guests had assembled , all those girls of the sheep
year wore placed in a separate room , and the boy was sent into the
same room too.
7. As soon as the girls had been the boy, they all wore with
ohild , and after nine months and ten daye the first child was boro.
All were startled , because it had a goat's head instead of a human
head, and Dang Tsum mila mgonmo went to the teacher to ask what
should be the name of the child. When he said that a child of very
bad caste with a goat's head had been born, the teacher advised him
• This account of the creation of gLing out of the body of the ogre is what
I bave called " the oreation of the world (earth)." After the opening of Tibet it
will probably be possible to find all the places mentioned in the account, and thus to
determine the geographical situation of the land gLing (perhaps the Lik of the
Mongola). Although the land gLing would then appear to cover only a small
portion of the surface of the globe, we must not forget, that in the minds of those
barly mon of g Ling it may have constituted the whole world known to them . Even
as the prosent time the conceptions of the Tibetans with regard to the size of
tbe earth we extremely narrow. The name g Ling mkhar castle of gling may
bs re boon originally the name of a bigh mountain with many peake. Thus for
instance the name of a luill not far from the Saspola bridge is Kesarri mkhar,
castle of Kesar. If in future times it should be pogible to fix the situation of
gLing, the question will arise: Do we nopy Actually, know the home of the Kesar.
Baga? I do not believe that the question will be settled 50 goon. In other countries
another version of the eaza may mention quite different localities. Besides that
not all of the names of the Kesar-saga appear to be of Tibetan origin, some of
them have a distinctly non- Tibetan character, and others look like translations
from another language. Finally, the question of the zodiac of the mythology of
gLing, we represented in the Agus, will have to be considered before it will be
possible to decide the question of the home of the saga.

19
not to speak of bad caste and to call the child Pasang Idan ruskyes.
When he came back, another child was born which had a lizard's
hond. This also was considered to be of bad caste, but tlie teacher was
of different opinion and said that this child's name was to be Angar
Itsangspa. Then the teacher told the boy not to come again, and gavo
him a letter containing the nanica of sixteen more Agus, who wero
to be born.
8. When all of the eighteen Agas were born they marched out
in the order of their birth, built houses and took wives. Because they
had no riches, they started in search of the castle Pachi dpal dong,
to get them from thero. The Agu dPalle rgopo, whose mother was
A smith 's daughter and who was believed to be very stupid , started
after the others had left. When crossing a brook, he found a fox
who could not get out of the water and who asked to be allowed to
jump on the Agu'n horge. This he was invited to do and in return
showed the way to the castle, where Agu dPalle arrived first of all.
The other Agus had lost the way and become entangled in thorns,
9. After some time Agu dPalle asked the grand-mother, who
was living in the castle, to tell him what treasures there were in
the castle, and the grand-mother anawered : " In the land gling there
will be born to father Thonpa and motlier Ngonmo a daughter called
a' Briguma (a' Bruguma). In the gling castle to the fore-father, the
smith Krashis, there will be born three, daughters, dKar thigmo,
Nug thigma and Gog bzang lhamo. To the lord cf heaven there will be
born three sons, Don Idan, Don yod and Don grub dkarpo. The latter
will die in heaven and be born to Gog bzang Thamo, to become the head
of the land gling. To the bird Khu yug rgyalpo will be born the bird
'Ong Idore, and to this one the bird Nyima khyung rung. The latter
will subdue Kesar, and will mark the frontier of sun and moon on
the sky (the horizon), antil Kesar will be reborn. His younger
brother, the bird (bat) So mig dmar will then be born and remain
on the high rock to hear the news, whether Kusar will be reborn or
not." Then dPalle said : " Bat the treasures, what kinds of them are
there here ? " and the grand-mother answered : " There is a pot with a
red mouth and a kettle with a crooked mouth ; the white moon is
the axe; there is the rope of several colours Gya stay and the white
bag, " Hold -thousand " ; the first of horses, the mare Thea langs ; the first
of cattle, mDromo ru yon ; the first of goats, Radkarmo; the first of
The names of these Agas will be found in the " Vocabulary and Commenta "
A list of the 18 Aug with their characteristic marks was also published in the
“ Indian 
Antiquary," Decomber, 
Part II, 1901.

20
ebeep, Drono ; the first of assos, Nagpo kha dkar ; the first of dogs, the
bitch dKarmo; the first of cats, Nagmo; there is the gelding with fire
in his month ; a bow ; golden and silver bearth -stones ; a pearl-white
lamb and a copper {coloured ) dog ; pearls and & grinding-stone of
turquoise." All these treapures Agu dPalle brought to the gLing
castle and put them into a atore-room . Seven days after be had left,
the other Agus arrived and carried off some gold , silver and copper
onch . When nothing was left, the castle Pachs dpal dong went to
pieces and nothing of it remained.*
GENEOLOGICAL TABLE .
brashis †
out of his field from his wife
Dong yeam mila Hagonmo Karthigmo Nagthigma Gogbzadglhamo
Kosar
the 18 Agus
dBangpo rgyab bzhin Thonpa, Angonmol Khuyag rgyalpo
Don yod, Don Idan, Dongrub1 ' Bragama "Ong laore
dkarpo reborn - Kedar.
Bo migdmar, Nyima Khyang rung
* In facing the danger of being ridiooled by experts on mythology , I cannot
help proposing to interpret passages in No. 9 with the help of the course of the
sau . Thi, is ouggested in the first place by the occurrence of the word nyima
" sun " in the name of the supposed un -bird. I hope that visitors to Ladakh
will take the trouble of certaining that this is actoally the case. The statement
that the man -hero will be killed by the sun -bird , fire by fire, reminds us of the
story of the bird Phoenix, who is burnt and ariser again alive and young ort
of the whee. This story hou, I think, always been explained with the fact that
the setting aan disappears in the golden .coloured clouds of the evening aky. Then
the propbosy, that the in-bird will mark the frontier of sun and moon on the sky
(the horison ) during the death of Kegar, Rooms to lend itself easily to the
interpretation, that during winter the sun is near the horizon (especially in our
mountains). Tbo next probocy, that the bird (bat) So mig dmar will remain
on the high rock and wait for the news of Kenar's rebirth , may refer to day myth .
The bat so mig dmar may be the morning star wbioh announce the rising of
the san . All the treasures of the castle down to the cat Nagmo, carried away by
Agu dPallo, seem to be objects of nature , the rest seem to be ordinary treasures.
As regards the animals, there will be no diffioulty. The first treasures I am
inolined to interpret in this way : The pot with the red month is the gun, the
kettlo with the crooked woath the moon, who mostly does not show her fal!
gironlar shape the moon axe may be the new .moon of sickle shape, tbe rope
roya stay of several colours the rain-ben , aud the white bag " Hold thousand "
the oload.
+ Kraghin in No. I and No. 9 are accepted to be identical.

21
VOCADULARY AND COMMENTS,
No l.
alakol, namo of the first country.
), great-grand-fathom fore-father,
Wâlur grand mothor.
thongros, ploaghed field.
ormotho, time for plonghing.
ar oba, first irrigation of a field.
27211 menpa, = ma yinpa, besides.
ཟེརས་པ། Lower Ladakhi for ཟེར་པ ] ssia.
351-551 at the time of.
2 | zam = team, so muob.
5 | drim , traok of any tree.
551 budra, tree.
7 | phoron = phagron, dove.
51 zod = thood, measaro, alike.
warga yal thag, threshing-floor.
EXOjalla = zhalba, clay.
yaste, transporting; related to skyelba.
No. 2.
rteig, caterpillar.
955 VIVI 'akhyangsces, to freeze.

92
4781 chun chun = chunpo, locks or fringes on the fore-head.
FS coti = cuti, pig-tail.
No. 3.
don , n cake used for offerings.
219501 burnt-offering of the pencil-cedar.
A t ysan, not yaon, isten, imperative tense. The respectful
vorbe do not change a to o in the imperative tense.
6991 rtse dgu, nine summits; was also explained as menning
rtsi dgu, counting ap to nino in sorcery.
Dongyaum mila , name of the boy of bkra ghis ; is
silid to mean " three pits to a man." I am , however, more inclined to
spell it ydong yun mila " three faces to (one) man," which explanation
would perbaps point to some figure similar to Brahma. The latter part
of the name we find perhaps again in the name Milaraspa.
No. 4.
Ena rjerpo = rjessa, after.
N5IN1 skarcas, to keep an animal in its place by surrounding it
(wbon hunting ).
D'AP | kyema, careful, carefully.
AAKT | bzangepo = bzang po. good.
No. 5.
dgossng = dgos 'adug, must, preg. tense.
bzhi, four corners; is said to refer to the towers of the
castle.
sa skang, said to me . " floor."

28
1 maydang, " mother-beam ," the thick beams in the roof
of & honse.
rdang, “ daughter beam ," the thinner beams in the
roof,
595 ) phranmo, “ the little ones,'' expression for " fingers."
thog krab, the branches which nre placed on the sticka
of the roof, before the earth is stamped on it.
thsei phoba, is said to be “ the little stomach."
apo mtho nangma, name of a hanting ground.
thangya, name of springs of water ; compare this word in
Jäschke's dictionary.
olong = phabong, rock.
akad onyan glingbu, " well-gounding fluto," name
of a place where probably the whistling of tho wind can be heard .
syab rten , " lean backwards; " name of a rock ; against
this rock Aga Khromo was thrown.
No. 6.
pagal mo dpo, the book for oasting lota.
45 * | bang ri, the feast given to celebrate the birth of a child ;
it may, however, be given many years later, if the parents are poor.
K y bingoes, to come out.
btage, from 'adegspa, to raise [n meal], give a meal.
noi Itanmo, a spectacle.
kbye rang = khyed raug, yon.

24
No. 7.
nine months, and then exactly on the
tonth day.
varal angonla rang, the first ( rot-barn).
paraitan ngun, here the same na rige pru , low coste.
W h yangder og uron to change back. The meaning
is horo : yon mart tako book your word that the wild mm od how
caste.
antara Itaangapa = Mtwangspa, lizard.
Pasang dan ra skyes, dame of the first Agn; it
means " posuansing the Friday (Venus), hords growing."
Lash appa ra Angar Itsangspø, namo of the second Agu.
The second part moans " lizard ;" the first part does not appear to be
Tibetan.
Ta memesis, by the grand-father ; Lowor Ladakhi form of
the instrumental in ni.
F I Akyocoscan, is almost a partioiple of the future tense,
" they who will be born."
pi bris yod, is written; a form of the pert, tense, which is
hardly ever need in Ladakh proper.
* 59978 Kha rgan dga ni, dame of the third Agu ; the
latter part of the name is perhaps dga nyi; tbon it would mean “ Old
month, day of joy," or Cani alone would mean coat of mail.'
pa A BS Kbrni mgo khrai thung, name of the fourth
Aga; it means “ falcon's head, short falcon."
15771 Skyaba rgodpo, name of the Bfth Agu; it means
4 mil poup-spoon,"

25
ITAC2 | Zlaba buangpo, name of the sixth Aga ; it means
" good moon, or month."
mDa dpon gongma, Dame of the seventh Ago ;
it means " the high headmau of bow -men."
WR 4 | Ala conggol, name of the eighth Agu; does not ap
pear to be Tibetan ; is said to mean " A boot's sole, the stupid one."
295529951 'aBu dmar lam batan, name of the ninth Agu;
it means " rod worm , way-loader."
aratas Shelli bazhang = buchung, name of the tenth Aga;
it means " little boy of glass (or crystal)."
d Ga ni gongba, name of the eleventh Aga ; it
means " day (?) of joy, the collar," or " coat of mail, the collar."
Lag lag ringe, name of the twelfth Agu ; it means
" long hand.”
Kang rkang, rings, name of the thirteenth Agu ;
it means " long foot."
S u ara Bong nag idamba, name of the fourteenth Agu ;
the first part means " black ass" ;-Idumba is said to be a plant.
bka blon Idapps, name of the fifteenth Aga ; it
means " the state-minister, the possessor.
550 | rangs, an ornament.
d Palle rgodpo, name of the sixteenth Agu ; it
means " wild splendour, glory."
Na jyu na rtgal, name of the seventeenth Agu ; it
meang " ear-tarquoise, skilful eur" ; " there was a miaprint in my
previous list of the Agus with regard to this name.
a Zlaba dkarpo, name of the eighteenth Agu ; it
means " white moon, or month."

26
No. 8.
kyei thsir, the order of their birth.
agarmo, wife or daughter of a smith.
AZTÝ grib phogste, got a black spot; used also in the sense
of " being atapid."
garš Pachi dpal dong, name of the castle of treasures ;
the first part I cannot explain; the second means “ well or pit of
splendoor."
5 KIEKVI rtam phongs = rta 'aphongs, sit ( behind you) on a
hoise.
No. 9.
braphi = aphyi, grand-mother; in Central Ladaklı the pro
nunciation of this word is abi.
KDA thaod bcadcos, spy out, examine.
re, what each = what kinds ?
WAN yabs = yab, father.
Way95941 yabs thonpa, name of 'aBruguma's father, " the
beautiful (fair) fatber.”
um angonmo, name of 'sBrogumi's mother, " the
blue mother ;" in the Sheh -version we find the name chorol.
'a Brigama, name of Kesar's bride; here the M8, has
'e Brigama instead of 'aBruguma ; it means " the young female Yak."
Just as in India, in Tibet also beautiful women are compared to cows;
see Wintermythns der Kegardage, No. V, 23.
yin thaod , yodthaod, it is, are forms of the dubitative.
1711 aco, lower Ladakhi for ajo, elder brother.

27
thee phos btangces, to dic ; compare 'aboba for
phos.
younger brother.
Garba bkrashis, name of the smith of gLiog ;
it means " the smith good-fortuno."
SK dKar thigmo, name of the first daughter of the
smith of gLing ; it means probably " the white-spotted one."
the smith
nag thigma, name of the second daughter of 
of gLing ; it means probably " the black-spotted one."
ma gog bzang lhamo, name of the third dangh
ter of the amith of gLing ; here we fad even baxang for za ; the
form tea, which I am told, ocours in the epic, has not yet been discovered
in the oral tales ; the name means " mother good-ashes, the goddess."
po rgyab bzhip, name of the Lord of the
gods: I am still keeping to this form of the name, because I find it
spelled thos in the MS.; but because also the Mongolian version has
Indra, it is quite possible that, as Prof. Grünwedel and Dr. Leufer sng
gest, the uame ought to be spelled brgya sbyin = satakratu. But it
must be remembered that the latter mode of spelling the word can
account only for the pronunciation rgya shin, not for royab xhin .
57245 Don Idan, name of the first son of the gods; it means
“ having an aim ."
on yod, name of the second son of the gods ; it means
" baving an aim ."
on grub dkarpo, name of the third son of tbe
gode ; it means “ the white one, fulbller of the aim ." The epithet
" white " in the form of garbo can also be found in the Mongolian ver
rion. It is not at all necessary to speak of Buddhist influences, because
the name Dongrab corresponds to Siddharta. As has been shown, the
name of Siddharta was in common use as a porsonal name in Pre-Bud
dhist times, just as the name of Dongrub is often met with iu Ladakh

28
at the present time. Both may go back to similar mythological concep
tions.
Sf 
a rsi bya Khayug rgyalpo, name of the grand-father
of the sun-bird ; it means “ the king bird Kbuyag."
ya 'ong ldore, name of the father of the gun-bird :
does not appear to be Tibetan.
99455551 
bya nyima kliyang rung, name of the sun-bird ;
it means " the sun-bird khyung rung." Hore we see the application of
laws of sound No. 3 (Ladakhi Grammar) with regard to the same of the
890-bird, which is in full khyung dlrung. (Compare the Ladakbi Pre
buddhist Marriage Ritual in the" Indian Antiquary," 1901, Introduction).
A similar case we find in the name Lamayuru with regard to the syns
tika. The latter part of this name is spelt even now -a-days yYong
dkrung. The modern pronunciation of this name being yarn, has not
only lost the tecgis before t, (besides the prefixes ), bat also the
final ng.
bya no mig dmur, name of the younger brother
of the sun-bird ; it means " bat red-eye."
kesar, name of the hero of the gaga ; the passage in No. 9
speaks very much in favour of the view, that the name of Kesar is to be
derived from skye ysar, the reborn one (newly born).
5911 deg, pot; an Urdu word.
yon, a crooked mouth.
a sgomo = 
sgjemo, bag.
ongebong, holding one thousand (buphels).
RTST rtai 'agona, in the origin of the horse, i.e., the first
horse.
21 | thsa langs, name of the first 
mare; the name means
" rising of envy ;" for this idiom compare ' A Ladakhi Bonpo Hymnal,'
gong No. IV, Note on No. 9. " Indian Antiquary," Vol. XXX, p. 361. In

29
my paper 'the spring-myth of the Kesar-saga ' we find the name 716
tbsa Idang, which probably means the same and can be translated in
two way .
wa rn yon, “ crooked horns," name of the mother of all cattle.
55 I re dkarmo, " white goat," name of the mother of all
gosta.
no, " beat," name of the mother of all aheop.
T ay nagpo Khadkar, " black, and white mouth," name
of the mother of all donkeys.
khgimo dkarmo, the white bitclı, name of the
motber of all dogs; in my springmyth of the Kegar-gaga 'sbe is called
drunnby brong dkar.
D'ATTATI bila nagmo, black cat ; name of the mother of all
cata.
| Khala me bar, " fre burps in the mouth ; " name of a
famous golding
ngidbu = egyidbu, hearth-stone.
15) curu, = byira, coral ; a branch of coxala is called a " hand
of corals."
theigbu = thaigu, grinding stone,

༄༅། གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་སྐྱེ་རབས། སྒྲུངས་ཡིན།
No. 1.
༄༅། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་གླིང་གི་ར་རྗེ་བཅོ་འིན་ཞིག་འདུགས།
ཞག་ཅིག་རི་ལ་ར་མ་འཁྲིད་དེ་སོང་པ་སང། རི་དཀར་པོའི་ནང་ནས་བུ་དཀར་
པོ་ཞིག་ཡོངས། རི་ནག་པོའིནང་ནས་བྱ་ནག་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོངས། ཁོས་བལྟ་སྡེ་
འདགས་པ། དེ་གཉིས་ཀས་སྣོལ་གག་བཏངས་པས། ཁོས་ཞིབ་ཆ་བལྟ་སྟེ་
འདུགས་པ། སྔ་མོའི་དས་ལ་བྱ་ནག་པོ་དེ་རྒྱལ་འཐབས་སོང། ཉི་མ་ཕེད་ཟམ་
ལ་གཉིས་ཀ་འདྲ་འདྲ་སོང༌། ཕྱི་ཐོག་བྱ་དཀར་པོ་དེརྒྱལ་ཆོད་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་
བྱ་དཀར་པོ་རྒྱལ་ཆོད་སོང་བསམ་སྡེ་འཐད་གྱིན་ཞིག། ར་མ་འཁྲིད་དེ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་
སྟེ་ཁང་པ་རུ་ཡོངས།
ཐོ་རས་ཁོས་ཡང་ དེན་ ནའི་ས་ཁྱོད་ལ་བལྟ་ཅེས་ཕི་ལ་ར་མ་འཁྲིད་དེ་
སོང་བས། ཡང་ད་རི་དཀར་པོ་ནས་གཡག་དཀར་པོ་ཞིག་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོངས།
རི་ནག་པོ་ནས་གཡག་ནག་པོ་ཞིག་བིང་སྡེ་ཡོངས། ཡང་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་སྣོལ་བས།
སྔ་མོའི་དུས་ལ་གཡག་དཀར་པོ་རྒྱལ། ཉི་མ་ཕེད་ལ་གཉིས་ཀ་འདྲ་འདྲ་སོང་།
ཕི་ཐོག་ལ་གཡག་ནག་པོ་རྒྱལ་རྒྱལ་རིག་ཚཤད་ཚུག་པས། ཁོས་བསམ། དེ་
གཡག་ནག་པོ་བདུད་ཅིག་ཡིན་ཚོད་འདུག། དེ་གཡག་ནག་པོ་ངས་བསད་ཡིན་
བསམ་སྟེ། རི་ཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།།

31 །
རི་དཀར་པོའི་ནང་ནས་གཡག་དཀར་པོ་ཞིག་བིང་ལོ།
རི་ནག་པོའི་ནང་ནས་གཡག་ནག་པོ་ཞིག་བིང་ལོ།
གཡག་དཀར་པོ་ལ་བལྟ་ན་སྲུང་བའི་ལྷ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ནམ།
གཡག་ནག་པོ་ལ་བལྟ་ན་ཟ་བའི་འདྲེ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ནམ།
གཡག་ནག་པོ་དེ་ངས་བསད་སྙིང་རིག་རག་ལོ།
མེ་མའི་དུས་ལ་གཡོགས་མཁན་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཨ་བའི་དུས་ལ་ལྷས་མཁན་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རི་དུས་ལ་ཁུར་མཁན་རིག་ཡིན་ལ།
ར་ཡུག་བོང་མ་ཐིལ་ཁྱི་ལྗག་གསུམ་ཡོད་ལོ།
རྡོ་བ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཟམ་ནི་རྟ་གྲོད་ཟམ་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྡོ་བ་བར་པ་ཟམ་ནི་གཡག་གྲོད་ཟམ་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན།
ཆུང་ཆུང་ཟམ་ནི་ར་གྲོད་ཟམ་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ།
དེ་སང་ཆུང་ཆུང་ནི་འཇུག་མ་འཇུག་རིང་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ།
གཡག་ནག་པོའི་རུ་ཙོ་གཡས་པའི་ནང་དུ་བཏང་ཡིན་
རུ་ཅོ་གཡས་པ་ལ་ལྡམ་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་རིག་འཕུད་ཡིན་ལ།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་སྐུ་ཞིན་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན་ལ།
ལྡམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་བར་བཙན་གྱི་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན་ལ།
ལྡམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་འོག་ཀླུའི་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྫོགས་པ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་ཕ་ལྷ་སྐྱེར་རྫོང་སྙན་པོ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྡུམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་མ་ལྷ་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།

32
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་བཅོ་བརྒྱན་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགའི་མགོ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་གསེར་པོའི་གསེར་རི་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྷམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་སྔོན་པོའི་གཡུ་རི་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་ཆུ་མིག་ཚང་ཨ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་གྲོ་མ་ཐང་གི་ཐང་འགོ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟུམ་པ་ཁ་ཅིག་ནི་དཔལ་མའི་ཨ་སྟག་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་སྤྱི་ཆུ་རབས་སི་རབས་འགོ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་སྤྲོ་ཐོ་ནང་མའི་ལིངས་ས་རུ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྡུམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་ལ་ལྗམ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྡམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་ལ་འཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལྟམ་པ་གཅིག་ནི་དཔལ་ལ་ང་རང་ལ་བོར་ཡིན།
དེ་ག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་དང་ཁོས་དབྱག་རྡོ་བཏང་སྟེ་གཡག་ནག་པོ་དེ་ཤི་
སོང། གཡག་ནག་པོ་དེ་བདུད་ཅུ་རུ་ལུ་ག་ཡིན་ཚུག། གཡག་དཀར་པོ་དེ་
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་གྲུབ་ཞིན་ཡིན་ཚུག།. དེ་ཞག་ལ་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་གཡག་ནག་དེ་
མ་བསདས་པིན་ན། བདུད་ཅུ་རུ་ལུ་གུ་དེ་རྒྱལ་ནས། ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་
དེ་བསད་ཅེས་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་རི་དཀར་པོའི་ནང་ནས་ཕྲུ་གུ་ཁྲུ་གང་ཟམ་ཞིག་
བིང་སྟེ་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོའི་མདུན་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། དཔལ་ལེ་ཁྱོད་ང་ལ་དྲིན་
ཅན་སོང་འདི་རིང་ཉེ་རང་མེད་ཡིན་ན། ང་བདུད་ཀྱིས་བསད་ཅེས་ཡོད་ཡིན།

33
ཁྱེད་ལ་ངས་རྔན་པ་རྒྱལ་བ་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན། མཁར་ཕྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན། ཡུལ་
གྱི་ཕུད་བཏང་ཡིན། ནོར་ཅི་དགོས་མཁན་བཏང་ཡིན། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་
བོས་ཟེརསཔ། ང་ལ་རྔན་པ་ཅིའང་མི་དགོས། ངོན་པའི་ཕི་ལ་ངས་གཡག་
ནག་པོ་མ་བསདས་པིན། ཉེ་རང་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ཡིན་བ། ངས་མ་ཤེས།
ཡིན་ན་རྒྱལ་ལ་སོང། ཉེ་རང་ལ་བུ་ཚ་དོན་ཡོད་དོན་ལྡན་དོན་གྲུབ་གསུམ་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེའི་ནང་ནས་ཕྲུ་ག་གཅིག ང་ཞ་གླིང་མགོ་མེད་ལ་མགོ་ལ་སྩལ་ན། ང་འད་
ཅེས་རག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱིས་ཟེརས་པ། ཕྲུ་ག་གཅིག་
ནི་བལྟ་བའི་མིག་གཡས་པ་ཡིན། གཅིག་ནི་མིག་གཡོན་པ་ཡིན། གཅིག་ནི་
བསམ་པའི་སྙིང་ཡིན། ཡིན་སྐྱང་དཔལ་ལེ་ཁྱོད་ནིང་ངའི་སྒོ་སྲོག་ལ་སྐྱོབས་
བཅོས་པ་སང། མེན་མི་ཟེར། ང་སོང་སྟེ་སྟེ་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་ཕྲུ་གུ་ཀུན་ལ་འདྲི་སྡེ་
ཞག་བདུན་ལ་བཟང་ངན་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཁ་ཆད་བཅོས
No. 2.
དེ་ནས་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་བས། དཔལ་ལེ་
རྒོད་པོས་ར་མ་འཁྲིད་དེ་རང་གི་ཡུལ་ལཡོངས། ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་སྒྲུབ་ཞིན་དེ་རང་
གི་མཁར་ལ་བསླེབ་སྡེ་ནང་མིག་ཅིག་གི་ནང་དུ་མགོ་བདུམ་སྡེ་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་
འདྭགས། དེ་ནས་བུ་དོན་ལྡན་གྱིས་གསང་མ་དང་གསོལ་ཇ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་ཞེས་པ།
ཨ་བ་ལེ། གསོལ་ཇ་དང་གསང་མ་འདོན་ལེ། ཉེ་རང་ལ་ཆོར་ཀ་ཅི་དྲག །
དེ་ནས་ཨ་བས་ཟེརས་པ། འདི་རིང་བདུད་ཅུ་རུ་ལུ་ག་དང་ང་འཐམ་མོ་སོང་སྟེ།
བདུད་རྒྱལ་དེ་ང་བསད་ངེས་ཡོད་པ་ཡིན། དེ་ནས་གླིང་པའི་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་
ཡོང་སྟེ། བདུད་ཅུ་རུ་ལུ་གུ་དེ་བསད་སོང། དེ་ནས་ངའི་སྲོག་ཤར་སོང། ཁོ་ལ་
རྗེན་པ་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོས་ཅིའང་མི་དགོས། ཁྱེད་རང་ལ་བུ་ཚ་

གསུམ་འདུག། དེའི་ནང་ནས་གླིང་མགོ་མེད་ལ་མགོ་བཅོ་ཅེས་ལ། ཕྲུ་ག་གཅིག་
དོང་ཟེར་འདུག། ཁྱེད་ཆ་ན་ངས་ཇ་དང་ཟ་ཆེས་ཟ་ཡིན་། དེ་མེན་ན་མི་ཟ་ཟེརས་པ།
དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་གུ་དོན་ལྡན་གྱིས་ང་མི་ཆ། ལྷའི་ཕྲུ་ག་མི་ཡི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཆ་
ཡིན། ཟ་ཅེས་ཟ་ན་ཟོ། མ་ཟ་ན་བོར་ཟེར་དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོངས།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ནོ་བར་པས་ཇ་དང་ཟ་ཅེས་འཁར་དེ་འཁྱེར་ནས་ཨ་བ་ལ་
ཞེས་པ། ཡབ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལེ། གསང་མ་དང་གསོལ་ཇ་འདོན་ལེ། ཉེ་རང་ལ་
ཐགས་སྲོ་ཅིའི་ཕི་ལ་བཞངས་འདུག། ཡང་ཨ་བས་ཟེརས། ནོ་རང་གླིང་
མགོ་མེད་ལ་མགོ་ལ་ཆ་ན་ངས་ཟ་ཅེས་ཟ་ཡིན། དེ་མེན་ན་མི་ཟ། དི་བུ་ཚས་
ཀྱང་ང་ལྷའི་ཕྲུ་ག་མིའི་ཡུལ་ལ་མི་ཆ་ཟེརས། ཟླ་ཅེས་ཟ་ན་ཟོ། མ་ཟ་ན་འདག་
ཟེར་དེ་ཡོངས།
དེ་ནས་ཆུང་རྟགས་དོན་གྲུབ་དཀར་པོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཞུས་པ། ཡབ་རྒྱལ་
པོ་ལ། འདི་རིང་ཉེ་རང་ལ་ཐུགས་སྲོ་ཅི་ལ་དྲག། གསང་མ་འདོན་གསོལ་ཇ་
འདོན་ལ་ཟེརས། ཨ་བས་འདི་རིང་བདད་ཅུ་རུ་ལུ་གས་ང་བསད་ཅེས་ཡོད་
པིན་པ། མི་ཡུལ་ལི་ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་ཟེར་མཁན་པོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། བདད་དེ་བསད་
སོང། ངའི་སྲོག་ཐར་སོང། ཁོ་ལ་རྔན་པ་ལ་ཕྲུ་གུ་གཅིག་གླིང་མགོ་མེད་ལ་མགོ་
ལ་བཏང་ཆད་ཡིན། ཁྱེད་རང་ཆ་ན། ངས་ཟ་ཅེས་ཟ་ཡིན། དེ་མེན་ན་ངས་
མི་ཟ་ཟེརས། དེ་ཕྲུ་གས་ཞུས་པ། ཨ་བྲ་རང་གིས་ག་རུ་བཏང་ནའང་ང་ཆེན།
ཤི་ས་ལ་བཏང་ནའང། སྟོར་ས་ལ་བཏང་ནའང་ང་ཆེན། ཨ་བ་རང་གིས་འདོན་
ཐང་འདོན་ལེ་ཟེརས།

35
དེ་ནས་ཨ་བ་འཐད་ད་བ་ཅེས་ཟོས།།
No, 3.
དེ་ནས་རྙིང་ལ་ཞུག་ལ་རྒྱལ་པོས་བུ་ཚ་ཚངཀ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། འདི་རིང་
ཁྱེད་ཚང་ཀོའི་ནང་ན་སུ་རྒྱལ་ལོག་བལྟ་ཡིན། མདའ་དོང་ཙེ་གང་རེ་ཁར་། དི་འུ་
ཚགས་མ་གང་རེ་བར། རྡོ་གྲུལ་བ་རེ་རེ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་ཐར་ལ་བང་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག།
དི་འུ་ཚགས་མ་གང་པོ་གཡོག་གིན་སོང། གྱེན་ལ་བང་འཁྱོང་ཟ་ན། མདའ་
རི་རེ་ལ་དི་འུ་སྐར་གྱིན་ཡོང། འདྲ་འདྲ་ཆ་ཆུག། སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཉན་ནའང།
འདིར་བོར་ཡིན། ཕམ་མཁན་པོ་གླིང་མགོ་མེད་ལ་མགོ་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ།
མདའ་བསག་སྟག་གང་རེ་དང། དི་འུ་ཚགས་མ་གང་རེ་བཀལ་ཏེ། རྟ་རྒྱུགས་
བཧང་ཆུགས། ཐར་ལ་ཆ་ཟ་ན། དི་འུ་གཡོག་གིན་ཞིག་སོང་། ལོག་ལམ་ལ་
བུའི་བང་གི་ནང་དུ་དེ་འུ་བསྡུ་འིན་ཞིག་མདའ་ལ་སྐར་རིན་ཞིག་ཡོངས་པ། ཨ་ཅོ་
དང་བར་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ལྔ་དྲུག་རེ་མིན་བ་སྐར་མ་ཐུབ། ནོ་ཆུང་ངུན་པོ་ལ་ཚང་
མ་བསྡུ་སྟེ་མདའ་རེ་རེ་ལ་སྐར་ཚར་དེ་འདྲ་འདྲ་སོང།
ཡང་རྙིང་མ་ཞུག་ལ་ཁོང་ལ་ཉུང་དཀར་བྲེ་གང་རེ་གལ་ཏེ་ཟེརས
ཁྱེད་ཀུན་ཐུར་ལ་ཆོ་ཟ་ན། ཉང་དཀར་གཡོག་གིན་ཞིག་སོང། ཁྱེན་ལ་བང་
འཁྱོང་སྟེ་བང་གི་ནང་ན་ཉུང་དཀར་བསྡུ་འིན་ཞིག་འོང་སྟེ་བྲེ་སང་དགོས་ཟེརས
ཁོང་ལ་རྡ་རེ་རེ་བཏང་སྟེ་རྒྱུག་ཆུགས། ཐུར་ལ་ཆ་ཟ་ན་གཡོག་གིན་སོང་། གྱེན་
ལ་ཡོང་ཟ་ན་ཉུང་དཀར་བསྡུ་འིན་ཞིག་ཡོངས་པ། ཨ་ཅོ་དང་བར་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་
དྲག་རེ་མེན་བ་མ་ཐོབ། ན་ཆུང་ངུན་བོ་ལ་ཚང་མ་བསྡུ་ཚར་ཏེ་བྲི་སྐུང་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས།
དེ་ནས་ ཨ་ཅོ་དང་བར་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ སེམས་ངན་སོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས།

ང་ཏང་གཉིས་ཀ་ཅི་ཡང་མ་རྒྱལ་བ་སང། གླིང་མགོ་མེད་ལ་མགོ་ལ་བཏང་རེས་
སོང། ནོ་ཆུང་ངུན་རྒྱལ་པ་སང། འདིར་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་འདུག་ཅེས་སོང་ཟེརས།
དེ་ནས་ཡབ་ཨ་བས་ཟེརས། ཁྱེད་དང་བུ་ཚ་ཚང་ཀ་རི་ལ་ལིངས་ལ་སོང་ཤིག།
སུ་ལ་སྐྱིན་དང་འབྲོང་མང་པོ་ཉན་ནའང༌། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་མི་བཏང། སུ་ལ་མ་ཉན་ན་
གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁོང་ལིངས་ལ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་ལུང་པ་རེ་
རེའི་ནང་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཨ་ཅོ་དང་བར་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་སྲག་པ་གཅིག་ཡང་མ་ཉན།
ན་ཆུང་ངུནཔོ་ལ་སྐྱིན་དང་འབྲོང་མང་པོ་ཉན་ཏེ། ལུང་པ་ཞིག་གི་ནང་དུ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
ཨ་༸གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཅི་ཡང་མི་ཉན་ཅེས་ཤེས་ཏེ་ཁོས་ཟེརས་པ། ལྔ་ཨ་ཅོ་གཉིས་ཀ།
སྐྱིན་དང་འབྲོང་མང་པོ་ང་ལ་ཉན་དེ་ཡོད། ཁྱེ་ཞ་གཉིས་ཀས་མི་བཙལ་འདག།
འདིར་ཡོང་ཤིག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་ཡང་དེ་རུ་སོང་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ།
སྐྱིན་དང་འབྲོང་མང་པོ་བསད་དེ་ལུང་པ་ཚང་མ་བསྐང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་
ལ་ཐེབ་སེམས་ངན་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། དག་ས་ཁོ་ཟུམ་སྟེ། འདི་ཤིང་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་
བདག་སྡེ་བོར་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁོ་ཤིང་རྒྱལ་ཆེན་པོའི་རྩ་བཅིང་སྟེ་བོར་ཏེ། ཁོང་
རང་གཉིས་ཀས་ཁོ་ལ་ཉན་མཁན་ནི་སྐྱིན་རེ་རེ་ཁར་ཏེ། ཁང་པ་རུ་ཡོངས། ཡབ་
རྒྱལ་པོས་ཡང་ཕྲུ་གུ་ཆུང་ངུན་གར་ཡོད་མ་འདྲིས། །
དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་གུ་ཤིང་རྒྱལ་ལི་དྲིམ་པའི་རྩ་འདགས་པ། དེ་རི་མཐོན་པོ་
ཞིག་གི་མགོ་ནས་མི་ཡ་མཚན་ཞིག་བིང་ཅེས་མཐོངས། མིའི་སྡོད་དེ་དཀར་པོ།
སྐྱེད་པ་དམར་་མཇུག་མ་ནག་པོ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག་གིས་ཁོ་ལ་གཏམ་ལན་ལ་གླུ་
འདི་ལྟར་སླང་སོ། །
ཤིང་རྒྱལ་ལ་རྩ་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་མིས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཤིང་རྒྱལ་ལ་དྲིམ་ལ་བཅིངས་པའི་ལྔ་གས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསར།

a7
ཁྱོད་ནི་ཕ་མ་ལ་ལན་ལོག་བཏང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ནམ།
ཁྱེད་ནི་ཁྱི་བསད་མི་བསད་བཏང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ནམ།
ཁྱེད་ནི་རྐུན་མ་མང་པོ་བཅོ་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ནམ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཅི་བཅོས་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ང་ལ་ཤོད་འང།
དེ་མིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཕྲ་ག་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། དེ་མི་ལ་ལན་ད་གླུ་བཏངས།
ཁྱོད་སྟོད་དཀར་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་མིས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
སྐྱེད་པ་དམར་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་མིས་ཕྲ་ག་པའི་བདག་ལ་གསན།
ཤམ་ནག་པོ་ཡོད་མཁན་གྱིས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཁྱོད་ཁྲུ་སུག་ཡོད་པའི་མིས་ངའི་དོན་དག་ཅི་དགོས།
ང་ཕ་མ་ལ་ལན་ལོག་བཏང་མཁན་ཞིག་རང་ཡིན་ལོ །
ངས་ཁྱི་བསད་མི་བསད་བཏང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ།
ངས་རྐུན་མ་རྐུས་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡང་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་དིས་ང་ལ་སྲབ་ཅིག་ལྟོས་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཤིང་རྒྱལ་དེ་པ་དྲུག་ནས་ཕུད་དེ་ཁར་ཏེ། ཁང་པ་
ལ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། དེ་ཤིང་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཁང་པའི་སྒོ་ལ་ཁྱོངས་སྡེ་། ངའི་ཕ་མ་གཉིས་ཀ་
ལ་བསིལ་ཞིག་ལྡན་ཤིག་ཟེར་ཏེ། དེ་རུ་ཁོས་བཙུགས།
དེ་ ནས་ཡང་ཞག་ ཅིག་ ཁོང་ཡང་ལུང་ པ་ཞིག་ གི་ནང་ ད་ལིངས་ལ་
བཏངས་པ། ཨ་ཅོ་དང་བར་པ་ལ་ཡང་ཅི་ཡང་མ་ཉན་པས། ནོ་དེ་ལ་སྐྱིན་
ཤ་བ་སྣ་སོགས་མང་པོ་ཉན་སོང། ཡང་དེ་ནས་ཟེརས། ལྤ་ཨ་ཅོ་གཉིས་ཀ།
ང་ལ་མང་པོ་ཉན་ཏེ་ཡོད། ཁྱེ་ཞ་གཉིས་ཀ་ཡང་འདིར་ཡོང་ཤིག་ཟེརས་པ།

དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀཡང་ངེ་རུ་སོདསྡེ་བལྟས་་པ་སང། སྨིན་དང་ཤ་བ་འང་
མང་པོ་བསད་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས། ཁོང་ལ་གླེབ་སེམས་ངན་སྐྱེས། ཁོང་གིས་
ཟེརས། འདི་རིང་ཡང་ཁོ་རྒྱལ་སོང༌། ད་ཅི་བོ་དགོས། ཁོ་ནི་ཕ་མ་འི་རྩར་
འདུག་ཅེས་སོང། ང་ཏང་གང་པོ་བཏང་ནའང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བཏང་ཅེས་སོང།
ཁོ་ལ་ཅི་བཅོ་ཡིན། ཨ་མ་གཅིག་ལ་སྐྱེས་མཁན་ཡིན། བསད་ཅེས་པ་སང་
ས་ཁང་ཞིག་གི་ནང་དུ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀས་ས་ཞིག་བྲི་སྟེ་ས་
མདོང་ཞིག་བཙོ་སྟེ། ཁོ་དེའི་ནང་དུ་བཏང་སྟེ། ཁ་ལ་རྡོ་བ་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་ཁྱོང་སྡེ་
ནན་ཏེ་བོརས། ཁོང་རང་གཉིས་ཀས་ཤ་རེ་ཁར་ནས་ཁང་པ་ལ་ཡོངས། དེ་ས་
དོང་གི་ཁ་ནས་བི་གང་ཆུང་ངུན་ཞིག་ལུས་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་བི་གང་པོའི་མདུན་
ལ་ལྕངས་པ་ཞིག་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་ལུངས་པ་ལ་དེ་བི་གང་པོའི་ནང་ན་མིའི་དྲི་
མ་ཞིག་ཚོར་ཏེ་སྣུམས་པ། བི་གང་ནང་ནས་ས་འབུད་དེ་ཕྲུ་གུ་དེའི་མགོའི་ཁ་
ཕོག་ དེ་ཟུག་ཚོར་ཏེ་ཁོས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།།
འདི་དོང་གི་ནང་དུ་ས་བཏང་མཁན་དེ་སུ་ཞིག་རང་ཡིན་ལོ །
ངའི་བཙོན་ཁང་ནང་དུ་ས་འཕང་མཁན་དེ་སུ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ།
ང་ནིག་ངའི་ཨ་ཙོ་གཉིས་ཀས་བཀག་སྟེ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
ངའི་ཨ་ཅོ་གཉིས་ཀས་བཙོན་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
ང་མ་ཤེས་ན་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་སྒྲུབ་ཞིན་གྱི་བུ་ཞིག་རང་ཡིན་ལོ།
ང་མ་ཤེས་ན་བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་དཀར་པོ་ཞིག་རང་ཡིན་ལོ།
དེའིཁ་ཡོད་མཁན་པོ་ལྷ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ན་འདྲེ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱེ་ཞ་སུ་ཞིག་རང་ཡིན་ནའང༌། རང་གི་གནས་ལ་སོང་ཤིག།

ཁོས་ས་དོང་གི་ནང་ན་དེ་ཟུག་ཅིག་ཟེརས་པ།
ལྕངས་པས་ཡང་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།།
དོང་གི་མཐིལ་ན་ཡོད་པའི་མི་ཆུང་གིས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
མའི་ནང་ཡོད་པའི་ལྷ་ཕྲུག་གིས་འང་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
ཉེ་རང་སའི་ནང་དུ་ཅི་ལ་བཏངས་སོ།
ཉེ་རང་ཕ་མ་ལ་ལན་ལོག་བཏང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ནམ།
ཉེ་རང་ཁྱི་བསད་མི་བསད་བཏང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ནམ།
ཉེ་རང་ངས་ཕིང་ན་ཕིང་ཐབས་ཤིག་རང་མེད་ལོ།
ངའི་ངོ་མ་ལ་འཐམས་ན་ཟག་ཟག་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེ་བོ་ལྕོག་པོ་རིག་མ་ཚོར་ན་དེ་ངོ་མ་ལ་འཐོམས་ལོ །
ངས་ནི་ཙམ་ཐུབ་གྱེན་ལ་འཐིན་ཡིན།
དེ་ལངས་ པས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ ངོ་མ་དེ་བི་ གང་པོའི་ནང་ནས་ཐུར་ལ་
བཏངས་པས། ཕྲ་གས་དེ་ཇ་མ་ལ་འཐམས་ཏེ་གྱེན་ལ་ཡོངས། དེ་བི་གང་པོ་
ཆུང་ངུན་ཡོད་པས། ཕྲུ་གུ་དེའི་ཤ་དང་སྤགས་པ་ཚང་མ་རྡོ་བས་ཤུ་སྟེ་འཁྱེར་
དེ་རུས་པ་མེན་ན་མ་ལུས། དེ་ནས་ཁོ་རང་ཕི་སྟ་ལ་བིང་སྟེ་ཤ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཐ་གུ་
ཟེར་པ། ཤ་དང་སྤགས་པ་མལ་ལ་སོང། ཤ་དེ་ཚང་མ་ཕོ་ལད་ལ་གྱུར་སོང་།
དེ་རྡོ་བ་གཉིས་ཀ་མགོའི་ཁ་འཁར་ཏེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་ཁང་པའི་མདུན་ལ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ། ཤིང་
རྒྱལ་ལི་ཡོག་ལ་བོར་དེ་ཁོས་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་བཏབས། ཡ་དཀོན་མཆོག་མཁྱེན་
མཁྱེན། འདི་རྡོ་བ་དེ་ཡབ་རྒྱལ་པོ་དང་ཡུམ་རྒྱལ་མོ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཨུ་པེན་ནི་
ལྡངས་བུ་ལྡན་ཅིག། རྡོ་བའི་འོག་ན་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆུ་མིག་བིང་ཤིག། མཐའ་

མ་ཟུན་ཏེ་ཨམ་བི་ཏི་ཕྲུ་ལུ་དང་འབྲས་བུ་མང་པོ་སྨིན་ཤིག་ཟེར་ཏེ། རྡོ་བ་དེ་རུ་
བོརས། དེ་ནས་ཆུ་མིག་དང་ཤིང་འབྲས་བུ་སྣ་མི་སྣ་ཚང་སྐྱེས་སོང། ཁོ་ནང་
ལ་སོང་སྟེ་ཡབ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་པང་ང་ཁ་བསྙེ་སྡེ་ཧ་ལ་ཟེརས་པས། ཡབ་རྒྱལ་པོས།
འདི་རིང་ངལ་ལ་ཝ་བུ་ཚ་ཟེརས། ་ བུ་ཚས་འདི་རིང་མང་པོ་ངལ་སོང་ལེ་ཟི་
རས།།
No. 4，
དེ་ནས་ དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་ ཞིག་ བདན་ ལ་ ལན་ བསླེབ་ ཅིས་ཡིན་བ།
ལན་ཅི་ཡང་མ་བསླེབ་བསམ། དེ་རིའི་ཁ་བསླེབ་སྡེ་མིན་བ། དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་
པོ་ལ་ཡང་ཡིད་དུ་ཡོང་བ་མེད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་ཡིད་དུ་ཡོང་ཅེས་སི་ཕི་ལ།
ར་མ་དཀར་མོ་ཞིག་གི་སྣ་མཆོག་ལ་རྩ་རག་ཅིག་བཏག་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས། ར་མ་སག་
འཁྲིད་དེ་ཁང་པ་ལ་ཁྱོངས། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེའི་ཨ་ནེ་དེ་ར་མའི་འོ་མ་བཙིར་
ཅེས་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ར་མ་དཀར་པོའི་སྣ་མཆོག་གི་ཅ་རག་ང་ར་མའི་འགྲམ་པ་
ལ་ཕོག་པ་སང། དུང་གི་པ་རི་བཅག་སྟེ་འོ་མ་ཚང་མ་ཕོས་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་
ཁོ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཀུ་ཅོ་ཆེན་པོ་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག་ཡོངས་པ། དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་ལ་
ཡིད་དུ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཐོ་རེ་སྔ་མོ་ཚུག་པོ་ལ་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང༌། ཁོས་ལུང་མཁན་
ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ་སོང་བ། རིམ་པ་བཞིན་ད་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ། དེ་ནས་ལྷའི་ ་
དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ཉི་མ་ཞིག་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་
གླུ་ཞིག་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ནུག་ཉིད་ལ་ཞུགས་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིན་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིན་ཕྱག་གསུམ་རིག་ཕུལ་ཡིན།

རྒྱུl
ཀྱི་མ་སྐུ་ཕྱེ་ཞུ་ཕུལ་རིག་ཡང་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
།ཁ་བཏག་དཀར་པོ་ཞིག་མཇལ་དར་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན
ང་ལ་རྡོ་ཞིག་བསོང་ཅེས་མི་འདག་ག་ལེ།
དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་བོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཞུས་བ།
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱིས་ལན་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
རྟ་ཞིག་འདིར་བཙོང་ཅེས་མེད་དཔལ་ལེ་ལེ།
རྡ་ཞིག་འདིར་བཙོང་ཙེས་མེད་རྒོད་པོ་ལེ།
གསེར་ཉ་ཞིག་ཉིད་ལ་ལམ་བཙུགས་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཐུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། གསེར་ཉ་ཞིག་ལམ་བཙུགས་ལ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་
གསེར་ཉ་དེ་ཁར་ནས་དབལ་ལེ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཡོང་སྟེ། འོག་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང། དེ་རུ་
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྗོགས་པོ་མགོ་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
།ཀླུའི་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྫོག་པོ་དི་ཞུག་ཉིད་ལ་ཞུགས་ལོ
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིན་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིན་ཕྱག་གསུམ་རིག་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ཀྱེ་མ་སྐུ་སྟེ་ཞུ་བ་གསུམ་ཕུལ་ཡིན། །
ཁ་བཏོག་དཀར་པོ་ཞིག་མཇལ་དར་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་རྟ་ཞིག་བསོང་ཆེས་མེད་ད་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྗོག་པོ་ལ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཞུ་བ་ཕུལ་བ་སང། ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྫོག་པོས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
རྡ་ཞིག་བཙོང་ཅེས་ང་ལ་མེད་དཔལ་ལ་ལྔ།
རྡ་ཞིག་བཙོང་རྒྱུ་ང་ལ་མེད་རྒོད་པོ་ལྔ།
།གཡུའི་གཡུ་ཉ་ཞིག་ཁྱེད་ལ་ལམ་བཙུགས་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན

དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་གཡུ་ཉ་ཞིག་བཏངས་པ་སང
། དཔལ་ལེས་དེ་ཁར་དེ་
ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཡོང་སྟེ་བར་བཙན་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང། 
དེ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་
མ་ལ་ཞུས། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་མ་ཞིག་ཉིད་ལ་ཞུགས་ལོ།
ཀྱེད་ཀྱིན་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིན་ཕྱག་གསུམ་རིག་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ཀྱེ་མ་སྒྲ་སྡེ་ཞུ་བ་ཞིག་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ཁ་བཏག་དཀར་པོའི་མཇལ་དར་ཞིག་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་རྡོ་ཞིག་བཙོང་རེས་རིག་མེད་ད།།
ཁོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཞུས་པ་སང། 
ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་གྱིས་ལན་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས
ཁྱེད་ལ་རྡོ་ཞིག་དགོས་ན་བཙོང་ཅེས་ཡོད་དཔལ་ལེ་ལྔ།
རྡོ་ཞིག་ཉོ་ན་བཙོང་ཅེས་ཤིག་ཡོད་རྒོད་པོ་ལྔ།
རྟའི་སྤུ་ཉག་རེ་ལ་རིན་ཞོ་གྲངས་རེ་ཟེར་ཅིན།
ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་མས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་མང། དཔལ་ལེས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་
ལྟར་སླངས།།
ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདན་མས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ལོ་གསུམ་གླིང་པའི་ར་རྫི་རིག་བཅོས་ཡིན།
ར་གཅིག་ལ་ཕེལ་དེ་ར་བརྒྱུ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
གཅིག་ཅིག་གིས་མེན་ན་སྟོང་ཁ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེ་ཀུན་རྟའི་དུ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
སྔོ་རོག་པོན་པོན་གྱི་དོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན།

ལོ་གསུམ་གླིང་པའི་ལུག་རྫི་རིག་བཅོས་པིན།
ལུག་གཅིག་ལ་ཕེལ་ཏེ་ལུག་བརྒྱ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
གཅིག་གིས་མེན་ནི་སྟོང་ཁ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ །
དེ་ཀུན་ཧོའི་རྡོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
སྔོ་རོག་པོན་གྱི་དོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལོ་གསུམ་གླིང་པའི་རྟ་རྫི་རིག་བཅོས་ཡིན།
རྡོ་གཅིག་ལ་ཕེལ་ཏེ་དོ་བརྒྱ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
གཅིག་གིས་མེན་ན་སྟོང་ཁ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེ་ཀུན་པོའི་དོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན། །
སྔོ་རོག་པོན་པོན་གྱི་རྟ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ལོ་གསུམ་གླིང་པའི་གཡག་རྫི་རིག་བཅོས་པིན།
གཡག་གཅིག་ལ་ཕེལ་དེ་གཡག་བརྒྱ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
གཅིག་གིས་མེན་ནེ་སྟོང་ཁ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཀུན་དོའི་རྡོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན་ལེ།།
སྔོ་རོག་པོན་པོན་གྱི་དོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ལོ་གསུམ་གླིང་པའི་བ་རྗེ་རིག་བཅོས་པིན།
བ་གཅིག་ལ་ཕེལ་ཏེ་བ་བརྒྱ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
གཅིག་གིས་མེན་ནེ་སྟོང་ཁ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེ་ཀན་དོའི་དོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
སྔོ་རོག་པོན་པོན་གྱི་དོ་རིན་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན།

e!
དེ་ཚང་མ་སང་རིན་མ་འཁོར་ཟེར་ན།
དངུལ་ཞོ་གྲངས་ཙམ་ཟེར་ནའང་ཕུལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྡ་སྔོ་རོག་བོན་པོན་དེ་ང་ལ་སྩལ་བ་དགོམ་སུག་ལེ
ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་བ་སང། ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་མས་
དོ་དེ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་དེ་ཏོའི་ཁ་ཞོན་ཏེ། རལ་གྲི་ཆག་པོ་ཞིག་ཁར་
དེ་ཁང་པ་ལ་མ་ཡོང་བ། སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང། དེ་རུ་ཁོ་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་
བསློབ་ཟ་ན། བུ་དོན་གྲུབ། དོན་ལྡན། དོན་ཡོད་གསུམ་གྱི་སྲིང་མོ་དེ།
ཕོ་བྲང་གི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་ཡོད་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ། 
དཔལ་ལེས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
དེའི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ཇོ་ཇོས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོནལེ
ཁ་ཐོག་གི་ཟུར་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ལྷ་མོས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
ལྷའི་དབང་བོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་ག་རུ་ཡོད་ལོ།
དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱི་ཕོ་བྲང་ག་རུ་ཡོད།
དབལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་དེ་ཟུག་འདྲིས་པ་མང་བུ་མོས་ལན་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས་སོ
ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་འདྲེ་སྐད་ཕིང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཁྱོད་ག་ནས་ཡོངས
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་སྒྲུབ་ཉིན་དང་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཅི་བཙོ་ཡིན།
ལྷའི་དབང་པོའི་ཁང་པ་དང་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཅི་བཅོ་ཡིན།
གྱེན་ལ་ཆ་ན་ཁྱོད་རང་གྱེན་ལ་སོང་དང།
ཐུར་ལ་ཆ་ན་ཐུར་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་རང་གི་བུ་ལོན་ང་ལ་མེད་ལོ།

45
བུ་མོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཅིག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་ལ་སྒོ་ཆེན་པོ་
ཡོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།
ལྔ་ཨ་མའི་བུ་མོ་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང༌།
ལྔ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཁྱོད་དིས་པའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
རྡོ་མ་ཤེས་ན་སྔོ་རོག་བོན་པོན་ཡིན་ལ།
མི་མ་ཤེས་ན་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོདཔོ་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
གི་མ་ཤེས་ན་རྡོ་ཚོད་མ་རལ་གི་རིག་ཡིན་ལ།
དེ་གི་ནི་ཚོན་ཆན་ཞིག་མེན་ལོ། །
ལོ་གསུམ་གངས་ཀྱི་ཡོག་ལ་བོར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ།
གངས་ཀྱི་གངས་ངར་ཕོག་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ལོ་གསུམ་ཆུའི་མཐིལ་ལ་བོར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ།
ཆུའི་ཆུ་ངར་ཕོག་མཁན་ཞིག་རང་ཡིན་ལོ།
ལོ་གསུམ་སའི་མཐིལ་ལ་བོར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
སའི་ས་ངོར་ཐོག་མཁན་ཞིག་རང་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་ལྷའི་དབང་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་བསྟན་ན་རྒྱལ་ལོ།
གལ་ཏེ་ཁྱོད་གྱིས་མི་བསྟན་རིག་ཟེར་ན།
ཁོག་སྟོད་བཅད་དེ་ནམ་ལ་ཕང་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁོག་སྨད་བཅད་དེ་སའི་མཐིལ་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ།
དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་དེ་དྲུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། བུ་མོ་དེ་འཇིགས་ཏེ།
ཁ་གནས་བབ་སྡེ་ནང་ལ་སོང་བ། ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱིས་བུ་མོ་ལ་

འདྲིས་པ། ཝ་བུ་མོ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་སུ་ལ་གཏམ་ཞིག་ཟེརས། ཟེརས་པ།
བུ་མོས། ཨ་བ་ལེ། ང་ཏང་གི་མཁར་རྩ་ལ་རྟ་ཞོན་མཁན་ནི་མི་ཞིག་ཡོང་སྟེ་
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱི་ཁང་པ་གར་ཡོད་ཟེར་རོག། ངས་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཁང་པ་དང་
ཅི་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་བསད་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་རག] ང་འཇིགས་
དེ་ནང་ལ་ཡོངས་པ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། 
ལྷའི་དབང་བོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱིས་བུ་མོ་ལ་ཁ་
སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཡིན་པའི་ཚོད་རག། ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་ཁོ་ལ་ལན་ཅི་གེ་
ལ་ཟེརས་ཟེར་ཏེ། ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་སྒོ་ལ་བིང་སྡེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་
གཉིས་ཀས་ལག་འཕྲད་ར་བཏང་སྡེ་ན། མཁར་ནང་དུ་ཡོངས། དེ་རུ་དཔལ་ལེ་
རྒོད་པོས་ཞུས་པ། ཉེ་རང་གིས་ཞལ་རྫུན་མང་པོ་བཏངས་ཞུས་བ། ལྷའི་
དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱིས་ཟེརས་པ། མི་སྟེ། གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ལ། ངའི་ཕྲུ་གུ་
གཅིག་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཡང་བཏང་མེས་ཡིན། དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་ཞག་བདུན་ལ་བུ་དོན་
གྲུབ་བཏང་ཚེས་བཅོ་སྟེ། དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཡོངས །
No. 5,
དེ་ནས་ཞག་གསུམ་སོང་བ་དང། 
བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་ཀྱིས་ཟེརས་པ།
ཨ་བ་ལེ། ང་སྔོན་ལ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ལྟ་སྐོར་ལ་ཆ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། བྱ་བདེ་མོ་ཞིག་
ལ་རྫ་སྟེ་སོང་སྟེ། སྔོན་ལ་རང་ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁྲུ་ཐུང་གི་ཁང་པའི་ཟུར་ལ་བབ་སྟེ་
འདུགས་པ། ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁྲུ་ཐུང་ལ་བྱ་དེ་བདེ་མོ་མཐོང་སྟེ། རང་གི་ཨ་ན་ལ་
ཟེརས། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
དེ་རིང་ང་ཏང་གི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བུ་རིགས་ཅན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
དེ་བྱ་ནི་བདུད་བྱ་ཞེག་ཡིན་ཚོད་འདུག་ལོ།

ཇོ་ཇོ་རང་ལང་སྟེ་ཐབ་ལ་མེ་ཞིག་ཕུས་ལོ །
མེ་ཞིག་ཕུ་སྟེ་རྡོ་ལྟོག་ཅིང་།ཀོལ་ལོ།
དེ་རིང་ང་ཏང་གིས་བྱ་ཤ་ཞིག་ཟེན་ལོ།
མདའ་ཁང་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་མདའ་ཞིག་ཡང་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
གཞུ་ཁང་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གཞུ་མོ་དེ་ཡང་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་བུའི་བྱ་སྤགས་ཤིག་རང་བཅོ་ཡིན།
ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁུ་ཐུང་གིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། གཞིད་མད་དེ་ལང་
སྟེ་མེ་ཕུས། རྡོ་ ལྡོག་བཀལ་ཏེ། མདའ་ཁང་ནས་མདའ་ཁྱོངས། གཞུ་ཁང་
ནས་གཞི་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། ཁྲུ་ཐང་གི་ལག་ལ་བཏུངས་པ་སང་། བྱ་དེས་བྱ་རྒྱུག་ཅིག་
བཏང་སྟེ་ན། ཕུར་སོང་། དེ་ནས་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མའི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བབས་
བ་སང། དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་འཐད་དེ་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལི་བུ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཚོད་འདུག་ཟེར་ཏེ།
དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་རང་གི་གཞིད་མད་པོ་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
ངའི་ངོ་ངོས་འང་པའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་ང་ཏང་གི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བྱ་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་ལྷབ་བྱ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཚོད་རིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ཀླུའི་ཀླུ་བྱ་རིག་ཡིན་ཆོད་རིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ཇོ་ཇོ་ཉེ་རང་བཞངས་དེ་དྲི་དོན་ཞིག་པོས་ལོ།
ཇོ་ཇོ་ཉེ་རང་བཞངས་དེ་ཕོགོག་དོན་ཞིག་དོང་ལོ།
སྦལ་མགོ་མ་ཆབ་རྒྱུན་ལ་མཐོ་དག་ཀ་ལྕོར་ཞིག་རོན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་ཕོབ་ཀ་ལྕོར་ཁར་དེ་ཁ་ཐོབ་ལ་སོང་བ་དང། བྱ་དེ་ཕུར་

48
དེ་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ལྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ། ཨ་བས་བུ་ཚ་ལ་
འདྲིས་པ། ལྕ་བུ་ཚ། གླིང་ཡུལ་མི་མི་ཚང་མ་དང་ཡུལ་ཚང་མ་ག་ཟུག་རིག་
འདུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་ཀྱིས་ཨ་བ་ལ་ཞུས་བ། ཁའི་མགོ་ཁྲུ་ཐུང་
ཟེར་མཁན་པོ་མི་རྩོག་པོ་རིག་ཡོད་ཚོད་འདུག། དེ་མེན་ནི་ཚང་མ་རྒྱལ་ལ་ཡོད་
ས་འདུག་ལ་ཟེརས།
*o. E.
དེ་ནས་ཨ་བ་དང་ཨ་མ་ཨ་ཙོ ནོ་སྲིང་མོ་ཚང་མ་ནང་མིག་གཅིག་གི་
ནང་དུ་འཛོམ་སྟེ་འདུགས། དེ་རུ་ཨ་མས་བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་ལ་རྒྱུ་འན་ཞིག་ཟེརས།
དོན་གྲུབ་དཀར་བོ་དང་
བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་དང་འདྲ་བའི་བུ་ཞིག་སུ་ཡང་མི་འདུག 
བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་ཁྱེ་རང་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་དགོས།
འདྲ་བའི་མི་ཞིག་སུ་ཡང་མི་འདུག 
དམག་གི་དམག་རེས་ཡིན་ན། ངས་ནོར་བཏང་ཡིན་བ། བུ་ལོན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ན།
ངས་ཤུལ་ཡིན་བ། ཨ་བའི་ཁ་ཆད་པོ་སློག་པ་མི་ཉན། སྔོན་ལ་ཟེར་མཁན་གྱི་
དཔེ་ར་ལ་བཙོ་ཐབས་མི་ཡོང། ཨ་མས་དེ་ཀླུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། བུ་དོན་གྲུག
ཀྱིས་ཨ་བ་ལ་ཞུས་པས། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
ངའིཨ་བས་འང་བུ་ཚ་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱིས་དོན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་བདག་ལ་གསན།
ང་ལ་མ་སྐལ་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་མཁར་སྐལ་མེད་བ་མི་ཡུལ་མ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་བུ་སྐལ་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུང་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་ཨ་ཅོ་ཞིག་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།

49
ང་ལ་མདའ་གཞུ་ལག་ཆ་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་ཟངས་བུ་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ལྷུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་ར་སྐལ་ཞིག་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་རྨོ་བླང་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་སྲུང་བའི་ལྷ་ཞིག་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་མ་ལྷ་ཞིག་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
ང་ལ་གྲོགས་སྐལ་ཞིག་མེད་པ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་གིས་ཆ་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང༌། ཨ་བས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངོས །
བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་འགྲོ་དགོས་བྱུང།
ཁྱེད་ལ་མ་སྐལ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ཡིན་ལ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་མཁར་སྐལ་གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དག་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་རྟ་སྐལ་ལ་རླུང་བྱུང་དབྱེར་པ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་ཨ་ཅོ་དེ་གསེར་སྦལ་གསེར་པོ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་ནོ་ད་ེགཡུ་སྦལ་སྔོན་པོ་ཡིན་ལ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་མདའ་མོ་ལྡོང་དཀར་མ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་གཞུ་སྐལ་དེ་ཕོ་ལད་གུར་གཞུ་ཡིན་ལ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་ལག་ཆ་དེ་རྡོ་ཆོད་མ་རལ་གྲི་ཡིན་ལ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་མདུང་སྐལ་དེ་མདུང་དཔལ་ཇམ་རིང་མོ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་ཟངས་བུ་དེ་ཟངས་བུ་ཁ་ཡོན་མ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་དེག་སྐལ་དེ་དེག་བུ་ཁ་དམར་ཡིན།

ཁྱེད་ལ་ར་སྐལ་དེ་ར་སྐྱེས་སྐྱེ་དམར་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་རྨོ་གླེང་དེ་མཇོ་ཕོ་རྐང་དཀར་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་སྲུང་བའི་ཕ་ལྷ་ཀེར་ཟློང་སྙན་པོ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་སྲུང་བའི་མ་ལྷ་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ལ་གྲོགས་སྐལ་དེ་ཤེལ་ལྕམ་འབྲུག་མོ་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་ཨ་བས་ཚང་མ་བསླབ་སྡེ་བཏངས་པ་སང། ཚང་མ་ལ་
ངུ་ཅེས་རེ་ཡོངས། བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་ དོན་ལྡན་ དོན་ཡོད་གསུམ་ཀའི་སྲོག་དེ་
འོ་མ་ཀོ་རེ་གང་རེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། འོ་མའི་ཀོ་རེ་ཚང་ཀ་ཨ་བའི་ལག་ཏུ་ཡོད་པས།
ཨ་བས་བུ་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཝ་བུ་མོ། ཁྱོ་རང་ཁང་ཆུང་ནང་དུ་སོང་སྟེ་ཀོ་རེ་
ཆེ་ཆུང་གསུམ་གྱི་ནང་ལ་འོ་མ་བསྐང་སྟེ་ཡོད། དེ་ནང་ནས་ཀོ་རེ་ཆུང་ཚེ་དེ་ཁར་དེ་
ོང་ཆེརས་པ། བུ་མོ་སོང་སྟེ་དེ་ཀོ་རེ་ཆུང་ཙོ་བོ་ཁར་དེ་ཁྱོངས། དེ་ནས་འོ་མ་
པོ་སྡེ་ཀོ་རེ་དེ་ཁ་ཐུབ་ལ་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། སྲིང་མོས་འོ་མ་ཕོ་སྟེ་ཀོ་ར་ཁ་ཟུབ་ལ་
བཏོངས། དེ་ནས་བུ་དོན་གྲུབ་དཀར་པོ་དེན་ན་མལ་ལ་གྲོངས་སོང།།
No. 7.
དེ་རུ་ནམ་འཁོར་ཆེན་པོ་སོང་སྟེ་རླུང་རག་དང་སེ་ར་རུ་མང་པོ་འབབས་
ཀྱིན་ཞིག་གླིང་ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་ལ་སོང། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་གྲང་ང་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་པ་སང་
ལྡན་ར་སྐྱེས་ཀྱིས་ཐགས་འཐག་གིན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོས་པུ་རི་
ཞིག་འགྲུལ་བྱིན་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀའི་ཀོ་རེ་ལ་ཇ་རེ་བླུག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཡིན།
དེ་ནས་མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོའི་ཀོ་རེ་ནང་དུ་སེ་ར་རུ་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་འབུད་དེ་ཡོངས།
གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོས་པ་སང་ལྡན་རུ་སྐྱེས་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། པ་སང་ལྡན་རུ་སྐྱེས་ལེ།

པའི་ཀོ་རེ་ནང་ལ་སེ་ར་རུ་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་འབུད་དེ་ཡོངས། དེ་འཕངས་བཏང་ང་ཟླ་
ཟེརས་པ། པ་སང་ལྡན་ར་སྐྱེས་ཀྱིས་ཀོ་རི་ནང་དུ་འབུད་མཁན་དེ་དཀོན་མཆོག་
གིས་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཟ་ཅེས་ལ་བཏངས་མཁན་ཡིན་ཚོད། འཕང་མ་འཕང། ཟོས་
ཏོང། ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་ཆེན་མོ་ཡོད་པ་སང། སེན་མོ་དང་བཅག་གིན་
ཞིག་ཟོས་པས། མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་གཟུགས་པོ་མ་བདེ་བ་འདགས། དེ་ནས་
ཟླ་བ་གཉིས་གསུམ་སོང་བ་དང༌། མི་ཚང་མས་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀེ་
སར་སྐྱེ་ཆེན་ལོ་ཟེར་རེད་ཚུག། ཟླ་དགུ་ཞག་བཅུ་ངོ་ལ་ཁོའི་ནོ་མོ་དཀར་ཐིག་མ་
དང་ནག་ཐིག་མ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་སེམས་ངན་ཞིག་སྐྱེས། དེ་ཅི་འི་ཕི་ལ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ན།
ཨ་ཅེ་ལ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀེ་སར་སྐྱེ་ཆེན་ལོ་ཟེརས་པའི་ཕི་ལ། དེ་ནས་དཀར་ཐིག་མ་
དང་ནག་ཐིག་མ་གཉིས་ཀ། མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོའི་སྐྲ་ཁྲུ་ཅེས་ལ་ཡོངས། ཁོང་
གཉིས་ ཀ་ལ་སེམས་ངན་སྐྱེས་པ་ སང་ གྲབས་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཐབ་ཀྱི་ལྕགས་ སྐྱིད་བུ་ལ་
སྐྲའི་ལན་བུ་ཞིག་བདག་སྡེ་བོརས། ཐབ་ཀྱི་ཁ་འོ་མ་སྲོ་བ་ལ་བཀལ་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
ནོ་མོ་དེ་ཕི་སྟ་རུ་སོང་སྟེ་ར་མ་ཞིག་ཁྲིད་དེ་ནང་ལ་འཕུད་བཏངས་པ། འོ་མའི་
མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་སང། ནོ་ མོས། ཨ་ཆེ། ར་མ་ཡོངས། འོ་མ་བློག་ཡིན་
ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་ཆེ་མགྱོས་པ་ལངས་དེ་ར་མ་རྒྱབ་པ་སོང། ལྕགས་སྐྱིད་ལ་
བཏགས་མཁན་འཐེན་བཏངས་པ། འོ་མ་ཚང་མ་ཐོབ་ཀྱི་ནང་དུ་ལོག་སོང། དེ་ནས་
མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་ཤུ་བ་མང་པོ་བིང་སོང། ཕྲུ་གུ་སྐྱེ་མེས་ཀྱི་ཞག་བསླེབ་
པས། ཕྲུ་གུས་ཨ་མའི་གྲོད་པའི་ནང་ནས་དཔེ་ར་བཏང་སྡེ་ཟེརས། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཨ་མ་ལ་བུ་ཞིག་སྐྱེན་པོ་ལྔ།
དོག་བཟང་ལ་བུ་ཞིག་སྐྱེན་པོ་ལྔ།

ང་ནི་རི་གསུམ་གྱི་རྩེ་ལ་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
རི་གསུམ་གྱི་རྩེ་ལ་རྡོ་བ་གསུམ་གདུང་གསུམ་རྩིག་ལོ།
ཅུ་རུའི་གྲལ་ཆད་རིག་ཏོངོ་ལོ།
མུ་ཏིག་གི་སྤྱི་ལབ་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཕེ་མར་རི་ཐོག་ས་རིག་ནོན་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་ཁོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཅེས་ཚོར་པ་སང། ཨ་མ་རི་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་རྡོ་བ་
གསུམ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། སྐྱོར་དེ་ཁམ་སྡེ་འདུགས། ཡང་ཕྲུ་གུས་ཟེརས། གླུ་འདི་
ལྟར་སླངས།
ང་རི་གསུམ་གྱི་རྩེ་ལ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ང་ཤ་བ་རིག་མིན།
ང་སྐྱེན་ཧོ་སྐྱེན་ལུང་གསུམ་གྱི་མདོ་རུ་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
ལུང་གསུམ་གྱི་མདོ་རུ་རྡོ་བ་གསུམ་གདུང་གསུམ་རྩིག་ལོ།
ཅུ་རུའི་གྲྭལ་ཆད་རིག་དོང་ལོ། །
མུ་ཏིག་གི་ཐོག་གྲུབ་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཕེ་མར་རི་གྲོག་ས་རིག་ནོན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་བ། ཨ་མ་ཡང་ལངས་ཏེ་ལུང་གསུམ་གྱི་མདོ་རུ་ཡོང་སྟེ་
རྡོ་བ་གསུམ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་སྐྱོར་ཏེ་ཁམ་སྡེ་འདུགས་པ། ཡང་ཁོས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟརL
ང་ལུང་གསུམ་གྱི་མདོ་རུ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ང་ལྦ་ཚོ་མེན་ལོ།
སྐྱེན་པོ་སྐྱེན་ང་ཆུ་ཆེན་མོའི་ཟུར་ལ་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
ཆུའི་ལྷུར་ལ་རྡོ་བ་གསུམ་གདུང་གསུམ་རྩིག་ལོ།
ཅུ་རུའི་གྲྭལ་ཆད་རིག་དོང་ལོ།

53
མུ་ཏིག་གི་ཐོག་གྲུབ་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཕེ་མར་རི་ག་ས་རིག་ནོན་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་མ་ལངས་ཏེ་ཆུའི་ཟུར་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་འདུགས། ཕྲུ་གས་ཡང་
གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
ང་ཆུ་ཟུར་ལ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ང་ཉ་མོ་རིག་མེན་ལོ།
སྐྱིན་དོ་ང་སྐྱེན་མ་ཞིང་གི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་ང་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
མ་ཞིང་གི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་རྡོ་བ་གསུམ་གདུང་གསུམ་རྩིག་ལོ།
སུ་རུའི་གྲལ་ཆད་རིག་དོང་ལོ། །
མུ་ཏིག་གི་ཐོག་གྲབ་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཕེ་མར་རི་ཐོག་ས་རིག་ནོན་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་མ་ལངས་དེ་ཡང་མ་ཞིང་གི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་འདུགས།
ཕྲུ་གུས་ཡང་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
ང་མ་ཞིང་གི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཞིང་གི་ཡ་མ་ང་མེན།
སྐྱེན་པོ་སྐྱེན་ང་མ་ཁང་གི་སྒོ་རྒྱབ་ལ་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་མ་སྒོ་རྒྱབ་པོ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་ཁམ་སྟེ་འདུགས་པ། ཕྲུ་གུས་ཡང་
གླུ་འདི་ལྟར །
སོ་རྒྱབ་ལ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ང་བི་ཕྲུག་ཅིག་མེན་ལོ།
སྐྱེན་ཏོ་ང་སྐྱེན་པད་མ་ཅན་རྟག་ཏགག་པ་ཁ་སྐྱེན། །
དེ་ནས་ཨ་མ་ལངས་དེཔ་དྨ་ཅན་རྟག་པའི་ཁ་སོང་པ། ཁོས་ཡང་གླུ་
འདི་ལྟར།

སྐྱེན་པོ་ང་སྐྱེན་མགོའི་དཀྱིལ་ན་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
མགོ་ཤ་ཁམ་གཅིག་འཁར་རེ་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
སྐྱེན་ཏོ་ང་སྐྱེན་རྩིག་མའི་ཕྱོགས་ནས་ང་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
རྩིབ་ཤ་ཁམ་ཅིག་འཁུར་ཏེ་སྐྱེན་ལ།
སྐྱེན་ཏོ་ང་སྐྱེན་རྐང་པའི་རྐང་མཐིལ་ན་སྐྱེན།
རྐང་ཤ་ཁམ་ཅིག་འཁོར་ཏེ་སྐྱེན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཨ་མ་ལ་འཇིག་རི་མང་བོ་ཡོངས། རྙིང་ནས་
ཕྲུ་གས་བདེན་པ་བསླབས། ད་ལྟ་འདྲི་དོན་ཐོག་དོན་ཏོང། ང་དང་མཉམ་པོ་ནོར་
བུ་མང་པོ་སྐྱེ་ཆེན ། དེ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཉ་ར་བོདགོས་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཉི་མ་དང་ཟླ་བ་
གཉིས་ཀ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ནམ་སྟོད་ལ་སོང། སྦྱིན་ཆེན་བ་རྒན་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་བྲག་སྟོད་ལ་སོང༌། སེང་
གེ་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་གངས་སྟོད་ལ་སོང༌། འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཁམ་པ་ཀུན་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་སྤང་
སྟོད་ལ་སོང་། བྱ་རྒྱལ་རྒོད་པོ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་རི་སྟོད་ལ་སོང། ཉ་མོ་གསེར་མིག་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་
མཚོམ་སྟོད་ལ་སོང། བྱ་ཕྲན་ཤོག་ཐོག་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཤིང་ཐོག་ལ་སོང། དེ་མ་འཚད།
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱིས་བསླབས་མཁན་གྱི་ནོར་དང་ཕྱུགས་ཚང་མ། མ་བག་
བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་ཞག་གཅིག་གི་ནང་དུ་སྐྱེས་སོང། དེ་ཚང་མའི་རིང་ནས། མགོ་
ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་ཁྲ་མོ་རྒྱལ་ཅིག་མཚོགས་ཤིག་སྐྱེས་པས། ཨ་མས་ཁའི་ནང་དུ་བྱ་
ཕི་ཞིག་བཏང་སྟེ། ཚིག་གི་ཡོག་ལ་ནན་ཏེ་བོརས། ་དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནེ་བཀར་དམན་
མོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་གཟུག་མེད་དི་སྒྲ་ཐོས་དེ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ། ཁྱོད་ལ་ཕྲུ་
ག་ག་ཟུག་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་ཟེརས་པ། གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོས་ཟེརས། ང་ལ་ཕན་ཐོག་
ཅེས་ཅན་ཞིག་མ་སྐྱེས། སེམས་ཅན་མང་པོ་སྐྱ་སྡེ་དཀར་ཁུང་ནས་བི་ང་སྡེ་སོང།

55
དེ་ཚང་མའི་དྲུང་ན་རྡུལ་ཅིག་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཚིག་པའི་ཡོག་ལ་ནན་དེ་ཡོད་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་ནི་
བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོས་ཁ་སྐྱེ་ཞིན་ཞིག་དང་ཚིག་པོ་འཐེན་བཏངས་པ། དེའི་ཡོག་
པོ་ལ་གླིང་རྒྱ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་གྱུར་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
དེ་སེ་ར་རུ་བབས་པའི་དུས་ལ། ཨ་བདུ་དཔལ་ལེས། པ་ཆི་དཔལ་
དོང་མཁར་ནང་ནས་ཁྱོངས་པའི་ནོར་བུའི་རིགས། སེམས་ཅན་ཚང་མ་ལ་སེ་ར་རུ་
ཕོག་པ་སང། མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་དང་མཉམ་པོ་དུས་གཅིག་ལ་སྐྱེ་ངེས་ཅན་སོང།
དེ་ནས་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ། ཀེ་སར་སྐྱེ་བའི་ཞག་ལ་དེ་སེམས་ཅན་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཕྲུ་
ག་རེ་རེ་སྐྱེས་པས།
དེག་བུ་ཁ་དམར་ལ།
དེག་བུ་སྐྱེ་རིངས་སྐྱེས།
ངས་བུ་ཁ་ཡོན་ལ།
ངས་བུ་ཁ་ཆོད་སྐྱེས།
སྟ་རི་ཟླ་བ་དཀར་པོ་ལ།
ཕོ་ལད་དི་སྟེ་པོ་རང་ཚོད་སྐྱེས།
ཐག་པ་རྒྱུ་སྟག་ཁྲུ་བོ་ལ།
ཐོག་བུ་ཁྲུ་གང་སྐྱེས།
སྐྱེ་མོ་དཀར་མོའི་སྟོང་ཤོང་ལ།
ཕད་ཁྲ་བོ་སྐྱེས།
དུ་རྒོད་མ་ཚ་ལངས་ལ།

ཀྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་སྐྱེས།
མཇོ་མོ་རུ་ཡོན་ལ།
མཛོ་ཕོ་རྐང་དཀར་སྐྱེས།
ར་མ་དཀར་མོ་ལ།
ར་སྐྱེས་སྐྱེ་དམར་སྐྱེས།
ལུག་དྲོ་མོ་ལ།
ལུག་པོར་ཟེ་སྐྱེས།
བོང་བུ་ནག་པོ་ཁ་དཀར་ལ་
བོང་བུ་ཁམ་པ་སྐྱེས།
ཁྱི་མོ་དཀར་མོ་ལ།
ཁྱི་ཕོ་གསེར་ལིངས་སྐྱེས།
བི་ལ་ནག་པོ་ལ།
བི་ལ་ཁྲ་སུག་སྐྱེས།
No. 9.
དི་རྒྱལ་ ཅིག་པོ་ལ་བཏངས་པ་འི་བྲ་བོ་ཟམ་གྱི་བྲང་རྒྱས་ཤིག་བཞང་སྡེ་
མདུན་ལ་བོར་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཨ་ནེ་སིས་པང་གི་ཁ་ལེན་ཏེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།
སྟེང་ཕྱོགས་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ཀུན་ནོན་པའི་ཨ་མ་ལ་བུ་ཞིག་བལྟམས། །
།བར་ཕྱོགས་བཙན་ཡུལ་ཀན་ནོན་པའི་གོག་བཟང་ལ་སྲས་ཤིག་བལྟམས
ཡོག་ཕྱོགས་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ཀཱན་ནོན་པའི་ཨ་མ་ལ་བུ་ཞིག་བལྟམས།
དེ་ཟུག་གི་ལྷ་ཕྲུག་ཀུན་བལྟམས་ཙ་ན་མི་ཡུལ་པོ་འོད་ཀྱིས་ཁུངས

རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ཀུན་བལྟམས་ཙ་ན་འཛམ་བུ་གླིང་འོད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱངས།
ཨ་ནེ་བའི་ཆོ་ཇོ་ཀུན་འཁར་རེ་ན་ཨ་ལོ་ད་ལོ་ཞིག་སྒྲུབ་ཡིན་ལོ།
བཀུར་དམན་གྱིས་ཀེ་སར་ཀུན་འཁུར་རེ་ན་ཨ་ལོ་ཞིག་སྒྲུག་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་བྲ་བོའི་ཕེ་ལ་བཅོས་པའི། འབྲང་རྒྱས་དེ་ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་
དམན་མོས་ལེན་དེ་གསོལ་མཆོད་ཅིག་བཏངས། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
འོ་ན་གསོལ་ལོ་དང་མཆོད་དོ་རིག་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
གསོལ་ལོ་དང་མཆོད་དོ་རིག་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
ངས་གསོལ་བའི་དུས་སུ་ཉེ་ཅས་འདོན་པ་རིག་དགོས་སུག།
འདོམ་པའི་དུས་ལ་བུ་ལ་སྲུང་བ་རིག་མཛད་ལོ།
དཀགས་པོའི་དུས་ལ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་རོགས་རིག་མཛད་།
འོ་ན་གསོལ་ལོ་དང་མཆོད་དོ་རིག་བར་བཙན་ཡུལ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
གསོལ་ལོ་དང་མཆོད་དོ་རིག་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
ངས་གསོལ་བའི་དུས་ལ་ཉེ་ནས་འདོན་བ་རིག་དགོས་སུག།
འདོམ་པའི་དུས་ལ་བུ་ལ་སྲུང་བ་རིག་མཛད་ལོ།
དགགས་པོའི་དས་སུ་ཀི་སར་ལ་རོགས་རིག་མཛད་ལོ།
འོ་ན་གསོལ་ལོ་དང་མཆོད་དོ་རིག་འོག་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་དུ་མཆོད་དོ།
གསོལ་ལོ་དང་མཆོད་དོ་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྫོག་པོ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
ངས་གསོལ་བའི་དུས་ལ་ཉེ་ནས་འདོན་བ་རིག་དགོས་ཐུག།
འདོམ་པའི་དུས་ལ་བུ་ལ་སྲུང་བ་རིག་མཛད་ལོ།
དཀགས་པོའི་དུས་ལ་གེ་སར་ལ་རོགས་རིག་མཛད་ལོ།

58
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་གསོལ་མཆོད་བཏང་སྟེ་ན། ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་ཨ་མའི་ལག་ལ་
བཏང་སྟེ། ཨ་མ་ལ་ཟེརས། ལྔ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ། འདི་རིང་ནས་ཕར་ལ་
ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་སུའི་ལག་ཏུ་མ་བཏང། མི་སུ་ཞིག་ཡོང་སྟེ་དོང་ཟེར་ཆེན། སུའི་ལག་
ལ་ཡང་མ་བཏང་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་ལོག་སྟེ་སོང༌། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་
སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཅེས་དེ་བཀའ་བློན་ལྡན་པ་ལ་ཚོར་ཏེ། བཀའ་བློན་ལྡན་པ་དེ་བདུད་ལྷ་
ཅིན་གྱི་བུ་ཚ་ཡིན་པས། ཁོའི་སྟོད་དེ་བདུད་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཡོད་པས། སྨད་དེ་གླིང་
པའི་མི་མཚོགས་ཡོད་ཚུག། 
ཁོས་ཤར་གྱི་ཤ་རན་དྲི་བ་རིན་དྲེ་ཚང་ཀ་ལ་
བསླབས། མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་གླིང་ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་སྐྱེ་ཚར་ལོ། ཁྱེ་ཞ་ཚང་
ཀ་ཁོའི་སྒོ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། 
ཐབས་བཅོས་ནས་ཕྲུ་ག་དེ་ཁྱོངས་དེ་མེ་ལ་སྲེག་སྟེ་བསད་
དགོས། 
དྲུང་ན་ང་དང་ཚང་མ་ལ་གནོད་པ་སྐྱལ་ཆེན་ཟེར་དེ་བསླབ་སྟེ་ན། ཁོ་རང་
ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་ལ་སོང་བས། 
ཤར་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ཤར་རན་དྲེ་བ་རོན་དྲོ་ཟེར་མཁན་གྱི་བདུད་
གསུམ་བླ་མ་རེ་ལ་རྫུ་སྟེ། 
མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོའི་ཁང་པའི་སྒོ་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་སྙད་
བཙོལ་བཏངས་། གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོས་ཕེ་བཏངས་པ། མ་དགོས་། མར་
བཏུངས་པ། མ་དགོས། དེ་ནས་ཉེ་ཞུ་ལ་ཅི་དགོས་ཡིན། ཡང་ནོར་མང་པོ་
ཕུལ་ན་ང་ལ་མེད་ཟེརས། བླ་མ་ཀུན་ནས་ཟེརས། ཕེ་མི་དགོས། མར་མི་
དགོས། ནོར་ཅི་ཡང་མི་དགོས། ཁྱོ་རང་གི་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་ང་བས་ཆོས་བསླབ་ཡིན།
ཞག་བདུན་ལ་ཆོས་བསློབ་བཅུག་སྟེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཁྱོང་ཡིན། ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་ཏོང་ཟེརས་པ།
གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོས་བསམ། 
ང་རང་གི་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་ཆོས་བསླབ་ན། རྒྱལ་བ་ཆེན།
ཕྲུ་གུ་བཏང་ཡིན་བསམས་ཏེ། ཕྲུ་གུ་བླ་མ་ཀུན་ལ་བཏངས། ཁོང་གིས་ཕྲུ་གུ་
ཁུར་ཏེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་གྱི་མ་གོ་ལ་འཁྱེར་དེ་བླ་མ་ཀུན་གྱིས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར

གླིང་གི་ཤར་པ་ཚང་མས་ཚེར་ཁར་བརྒྱ་ཙམ་བྱོང།
གླིང་གི་ན་ཆུང་ཚང་མས་མར་བྲེ་བརྒྱ་ཙམ་ཁྱོང །
སུ་ལ་མི་བཏུལ་བའི་སྲིན་བུ་ང་ཞ་ལ་བཏུལ་ལོ། །
སུ་ལ་མི་ཐོབ་པའི་བདུད་ཕྲུག་དེ་ང་ཞུ་ལ་ཐོབ་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་མགར་བ་ཀུན་གྱིས་ལྕགས་ཟེར་རིབ་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་ང་ཏང་གིས་བདུད་ཕྲུག་དེ་བཏུལ་ཡིན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ཏང་གིས་སྲིན་བུ་དེ་བསད་ཡིན། །
ལྕག་ག་ན་མ་སྐྱིལ་ན་ཡལ་ག་སོང་སྟེ་མི་ཉན་ལོ།
ཆུང་ངུན་ལ་མ་ཉན་ན་ཆེན་མོ་སོང་སྟེ་མི་ཉན་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་ཤར་པ་ཀུན་གཟིགས་མོ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་ན་ཆུང་ཚང་མ་གཟིགས་མོ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
བདུད་དྲི་བདུད་ཕྲུག་གསོན་སྲེགས་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་ཀུ་ཅོ་ཆེན་མོ་བཏངས་པ་སང། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་ཤར་པ་
ཚང་མས་ཚེར་ཁར་རེ་འཁར་དེ་ཡོངས། ན་ཆུང་ཚང་མས་མར་བྲེ་བགང་རེ་འཁོར་
ཏེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ཟུག་གི་ཚེར་མ་ཁར་བརྒྱ་དང་མར་བྲེ་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་བསླེབ། མགར་
བ་ཚང་མས་ལྕགས་ཟེར་ཡང་ཁྱོངས། དེ་ནས་ཕྱོགས་བཞི་ལ་ལྕགས་ཟེར་རྒྱབས།
ཚེར་མའི་ཤིང་ཚང་མ་སྤུངས། དེའི་གཞུང་ལ་ཕྲུ་ག་དེ་བཏངས། མར་ཚང་མ་
དེ་ཁ་བླུགས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དཔན་མོ་ཨ་མ་ཆུང་ཙེ་དཀར་ཐིག་མ་ལ་རྫུ་
སྟེ་མ་གོས་བཟང་ལྷ་མོའི་ཚོར་སོང་སྟེ། ལྷ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ། ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་གར་ཡོད་
ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་མས། ཕྲུ་ག་དེ་བླ་མ་གསུམ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཆོས་བསླབ་པ་འཁྱེརས།

ཕྱི་ཐོག་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་འཁྱོང་ཆེན་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་དཀར་ཐིག་མ་མགྱོགས་པ་ལྷ་ལ་
སོང་པ་སང། ཕྲུ་ག་དེ་མེའི་གཞུང་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དཀར་ཐིག་མས་
ངུ་འིན་ཞིག་ཟེརས། །
མི་དང་ཀུན་ནི་ཁྲིམས་ལ་སྦྱང་མཁན་ལ་ཕེ་བཏང་ཆེན།
གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོས་ཕེའི་ཚབས་ལ་ཕྲུ་གུ་བཏངས
ཨ་མ་གོག་བཟང་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་སུན་ཏེ་བདུད་དི་ལག་ལ་བཏངས།
ངའི་ཕྲུ་གུ་ག་ཟུག་ལ་འཁྱོང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ངུས་པ་སང། ཕྲུ་གུས་ཨ་མ་ལ་ཟེརས། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
བུ་ཚའི་ཨ་མ་ཆུང་བས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
མ་དཀར་ཐིག་མས་བུ་ཚ་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན།
ནམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ལ་བལྟས་པ།
ཉི་ཟླ་གཉིས་ཀ་ཁྲ་གསལ་ལེ་ཞུགས།
སྐར་ཚོགས་འཇོམ་མོ་གཞུང་ལ་སྲུང་སྟེ་འདུག་
ང་ལ་ཕ་མ་མེད་མཁན་སོང།
གངས་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ལ་བལྟས་ཀྱང།
གངས་སི་སིང་གེ་ཁྲ་གསལ་བ་འདུག
སིང་ཕྲུག་ལེགས་མོ་མདུན་ལ་སྲུངས།
ང་ལ་ཕ་མ་མེད་མཁན་སོང།
བྲག་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ལ་བལྟས་ཀྱང།

$1
སྐྱིད་ཆེན་ཨ་བ་ཅིང་ན་འདུག།
ཨ་མ་དན་མོ་སྔོན་ལ་འདུག།
ཤ་ཕྲུག་ལེགས་མོ་གཞུང་ལ་སྲུངས།
ང་ལ་ཕ་མ་མེད་མཁན་སོང།
མཚོམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ལ་བལྟས་ཀྱང།
ཉ་མོ་ཨ་མ་སྔོན་ལ་འདུག།
ཉ་ཕོ་ཨ་བ་རྙིང་ན་འདུག།
ཉ་ཕྲུག་ལེགས་པོ་གཞུང་ལ་སྲུངས།
ང་ལ་ཕ་མ་མེད་མཁན་སོང།
མི་དང་ཀུན་གྱིས་ལུང་མཁན་ལ་ཕེ་བཏང་ཅེན་བ།
ངའི་ཨ་མས་པེ་ཚབ་ལ་ཕྲུ་གུ་བཏང་སོང།
མ་ཤམས་ཨ་མ་གཟིགས་མོ་ལྟོས།
ཕྱོགས་བཞི་ལྕགས་ཐག་བརྐྱང་བ་དེ།
གླིང་བཞི་ང་ལ་ནོན་པའི་རྟགས་ཤིག་ཡིན།
མ་ཤུམས་ཨ་མ་གཟིགས་མོ་གཟིགས།
ཚེར་ཁར་བརྒྱ་དེ་ངའི་ལག་སྲོས་ཤིག་ཡིན།
མར་བྲེ་བརྒྱ་དེ་ངའི་ལག་སྐུད་ཅིག་ཡིན།
མ་ཤུམས་ཨ་མ་གཟིགས་མོ་གཟིགས།
གླིང་གི་ཤར་པ་ཚང་མས་གཟིགས་མོ་གཟིགས།
གླིང་གི་ན་ཆུང་ཚང་མས་གཟིགས་མོ་གཟིགས།

62
ཤར་རན་དྲེ་ཕ་རན་དྲེ་གསུམ་ཀ་མེ་ནང་དུ་ཕང་ཡིན།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རིང་སིང་གེ་མཚོགས་མཆོངས་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་བུ་མོ་དེ་མེའི་ནང་ནས་བིང་སྟེ། ལྕགས་ཐག་དེ་བཅད་
དེ་བིང་སྟེ་ཕར་མཆོངས་ཚུར་མཆོངས་བཏང་ཛིན་ཞིག། ཤར་རིན་དྲེ་བ་རན་དྲེ་
གསུམ་ཀ་ཟུམ་སྟེ་མེའི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་ཕང་སྟེ་བཏངས་པ་ ། དེ་མི་ཚོགས་ཚང་མ་
འཇིགས་དེ་ཡ་མཚན་སོང་སྡེ་ཤོར་ཏེ་སོང། དེ་ནས་མ་དོ་ཀར་ཐིག་མ་དང་ཕྲུ་གུ་
གཉིས་ཀ་ཁང་པ་ལ་ཡོངས། དཀར་ཐིག་མས་མ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས།
ཝ་གོག་བཟང་ལྷ་མོ། ཁྱོ་རང་གི་ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་བླ་མ་ཚང་ཀས་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་མེའི་གཞུང་
ལ་ཕྱོགས་བཞི་ལ་ལྕགས་ཐག་བཏགས་དེ་འདུག། དག་ས་ཁོ་རང་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོངས།
ད་ནས་ ཕར་ལ་ མི་སུ་ལ་ཡང་མ་བཏང་ཟེར་ཏེ་ དཀར་ཐིག་མ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཁང་པ་
ལ་སོང།།
No. 10,
ཨ་མ་གོག་ བཟང་ལྷ་མོ་ལ་ཕྲུ་གུ་མ་སྐྱེ་བའི་སྔོན་ལ་མཛོ་ནད་ཕོག་སྟེ་
ཡོད་ཚུག། ཞག་ཅིག་ཕྲུ་གུས་ཟེརས། ཨ་མ་རང་གིས་སྐྲ་འཁྲུ་སྟེ་ན། གཞན་
མའི་ནང་ལ་མ་ཆ། ང་དང་ང་ནང་དུ་བུ་མོ་ཞིག་ཁྱོང་སྡེ་ལྷ་བཅུག། དེ་མེན་ནི་ང་
དང་གི་ནང་ལ་ཀོན་མ་ཞུགས་ཡིན། ང་ཤིང་ཞིག་འཁྱོང་བ་རི་ལ་ཆེན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཐག་
པ་ཞིག་དང་ལོག་པ་ཞིག་ཁུར་ཏེ། བུ་ཚ་ཤིང་ལ་སོང། ཕྲུ་གུ་སོང་ཚར་ར་དང།
ཡ་མས་སྐྲ་ལྷ་ཅེས་ལ་ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་པའི་རྩྭ་སོང། ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་མཐོང་སྟེ་ལོག་
སྡེ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ནང་ན ་ཡོད་མཁན་ནི་ཆ་ལག་ཚང་མ་སྦས་ཏེ་མེད་མཁན་བཅོས།
ཀག་ཆག་ཅིག་གི་ཀ་ས་ཙེ་ཞིག་བོར་དེ་ན། ཡང་རི་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་སོང་། ཤིང་

dg
ཁར་དེ་ཡོང་ཟན། ཨ་མ་ད་རུང་སྐྲ་ལྷ་མ་ཚར་བ། ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་པའི་རྩ་ཡོད་
ཚུག། ཕྲུ་གས་བོས་ཏེ་གཉིས་ཀ་ནང་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་བལྟ་ཟ་ན། རྐུན་མས་འཁྱེར་
དེ་ཆ་ལག་ཅི་ཡང་མེད་ཚུག། ཕྲུ་གས་ཨ་མ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཨ་མ་རང་ལ་ངས་
སྔོན་ལ་ཟེརས། ཡ་མ་རང་མིའི་རྩི་སོང་པ་སང། ཀོན་མ་ཡོངས། ང་ལྟོགས་
ས་རག། ཟ་ཅེས་ཤིག་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་མས། ཟ་ཅེས་ཅི་བཏང་ཡིན།
ནང་ད་ཅི་ཡང་མི་འདུག། ཀག་ཆག་ཅིག་གི་ཁ་ས་ཙེ་ཞིག་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ།
བུ་ཚས་དེ་ས་ཚེ་བོ་གཡོས་ཤིག་བརྔོས་ཏེ་ཧོང་ཟེརས། ཨ་མས་གཡོས་བརྔོས་
པ་སང། ཡང་བོར་ནས་སི་སྣོད་མེད་ཚུག། ཕྲུ་གུས་ངའི་ལག་པའི་ཁ་དོང་
ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་མས། ཁྱོ་རང་ཕྲུ་གུའི་ལག་པ་ཧ་ས་ཡོང་ཆེན། ངའི་རྒན་
ལག་སྲན་ཏེ་ཡོང་ཡིན་འགྲོ། ངའི་ལག་པའི་ཁ་དོང་ཟེརས། ཨ་མའི་ལག་པའི་
ཁ་བཏང་སྟེ་ ས་ ཚན་དང་གཡོས་ཚན་པོ་ཨ་མའི་ལག་པའི་ནང་ལ་བསྡམས་ཏེ་
བོརས། ཨ་མ་ལ་ཚན་དེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཀུ་ཅོ་བཏངས་པ། ཕྲུ་གུས། ངའི་ཨ་བ་
གར་ཡོད་སྟོན། ང་ལ་ཨ་བ་མེད་པ། མི་ཚང་མས་ཁ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ནལ་ལུ་ཟེར་འདུག།
མི་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཨ་བ་འདུག། ང་ཨ་བ་མེད་ཅེས་ཅི་ཡིན་ཟེརས། ཨ་མས་
ཟེརས། ཁྱོ་རང་གི་ཨ་བ་དེ་སུ་ཡིན་ང་ལ་རྒྱས་མེད། མེ་མེ་བསློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་
དག་ལ་འདྲི་བ་ལ་སོང། མེ་མེ་ལ་རྒྱུས་ཡོང་ཡིན་འགྲོ་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་མའི་ལག་
བ་འཕུད་བཏོངས་པ། ལག་པ་ཚང་མ་ཆོལ་སྒང་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་
ཕྲུ་གུས་ཧ་ཧ་ཟེར་ཏེ་ལག་པ་དང་ཤད་པ། སྔོན་མེའི་མཚོགས་སོང། མཛེ་ནད་
ཕོག་མཁན་ནི་གཟུགས་པོ་ཡང་ཕན་སོང།།

THE STORY OF KESAR'S BIRTH .
ABSTRACT or CONTEXTB.
1,
One day, when Agu dPallo rgodpo was tonding goats, there came
A white bird out of a white hill, and a black bird out of a black hill,
who fought with one another. In the morning the black bird was
winning, at noon both were equal, and in the evening the white bird
was wiuning
The next day & white yak came out of a white hill, and a black
yak out of a black bill. In the morning the white yak was winning,
At noon both were equal, and in the evening the black yak was win
ning. Aga d Palle who believed the black yak to be a devil, decided to
kill him with his sling and to break 18 pieces out of his might horn.
Those will be dedicated : to dBangpo rgyabxhin; mother Kyabe bdun ,
någa-kiog Wogpo, :Kyer rdong snyanpo, bKur dman rgyalmo, the 18
Agus, the top of the g Ling-castle, the golden bill, the turquoise hill, the
spring Thaangya, the Groma-plain, to dPalmai astag, the ford «Bi chu, tlie
bunting-ground Protho nangma, to father Thonpa and mother #Ngonmo,
to 'aBruguma, to the store-house of hia treasures, and the last piece to
himself.
The white yak had been & transformation of dBangpo royabzhin,
and the black yak of the devil Ourulugu. Then ont of the white hill
there came a child, about a yard high another transformation of
Bangpo rgyabzhin), and offered all his treasures and half of big land
and castle to the Agu in recognition of the services rendered to him .
The Aga refused to accept anything, bat demanded that one of the
three song of the king of heaven should be sent to the headless
1 dPalmai astag, the glorious little village, and the ford aBi shu , are parts of
the gLing.land, wbich were probably omitted in the history of the creation. Pro
logue to the Kenar-saga, No. 5. d Palmai astag is also the name of a lomale aga.
Here '& Bragama's father is called Thonpa ; later on the name or Tanpa taran
ap again ; ho has two names apparently,

65
gLing-land as ito load. The king of heaven promises to send word
After seven days!
dBangpo rgyabzhin returned to the upper land of the gods, and
went to sleep with his head wrapped ap. His eldest son Don ldan
brought him his meal and tea and asked him about the reason of his
Borrow . The father told him of his promise to send one of his gons to
the gLing-land ; if he would not like to go ? Don Idan said : " How
could a son of the gods go to the land of mon ? Eat the food, if you
like; and leave it, if you do not like !”
The second son Donyod was asked the same questions, but he
also refused to go .
When the third son Don grub was asked it he would go to the land
of men , he said : “ I shall go wherever my father may send me, oven
to a place where I shall have to die or get lost!” Then the father took
the tea and the meal.
3 .
Tbo next day the King (of heaven ) said to his three sons: " Tako
& quiver woh and a sieve full of arrow -blades each. When riding
downwards, scatter the arrow-blades about; when riding upward, g&
ther the arrow .heads and put them on to the arrow -shafts. Who wins iu
the contest, will remain here , who loses, will have to go to the land of
men ! " The little son Don grub won and did not miss & single arrow
hoad .
The following day the king gave them a bashel filled with mus.
tard-seeds each and told them to scatter tbem about, when riding
downward, and to gather them , when riding upward . Again Don grub
won, because he did not miss & single mostard-Beed.
Then the elder brothers were full of wrath and said : “ Well, we
whall have to go as its head to the gLing-lead, and Don grub ia to
I This version of the birth-story of Kesar will be usefully compared with the
one pablished in the Indisa Antiquary, and which I shall all the Sheh-version
(Bpring Myth of the Kenar Saga, No. I-V ). In the Sheh-version only a fight of
two birds is mentioned. It is not at all 500essary to believe, that the report of a
doable fight in the shape of birds and yake is the original tale. Here the Lower
Ladakhi version simply ahows one of the characteristics of the oral versions of the
Xocar Bega, 16., the toudenoy to take hold of other versions which are current in
other villages, and to embody them into the original version of the village by telling
ons atter the other, leaving the versions almost entirely untouched. Other in
utenow we mhall notice later on. This chansoteristio hae been moutioned in the
I. A .

66
remain here !" Again their father sent them a-bunting, saying : “ Who
of you will bring me many wild goats and wild yaks, will not be sent
to the gLing-land !" It was Don grub who alone was successful,
Therefore his wrathful elder brothers tied him to a high tree, and went
home with his booty. Father did not even ask where Don grub re
mained.
Out of a hill came a man wliose apper part wag white, the mid
dling part red, and the lower part black,' and said to Don grub: " Did
you perhaps not obey father and mother, did you kill a man or a dog ,
or ere you a thief, that you are tied to this tree ? " Don grub replied :
“ Yes, I did all you say, but now look at me !" Saying this, he pulled
out the tree and carried it home, where he planted it before the door of
the bouse, to give ahade to his father and mother.
Again the three brothers were sent a-hunting, and again the little
one alone was successful. Thig time he was thrown into a pit by his
elder brothers, and relieved by a lizard, whoso tail le seized . Because
the hole through which he was dragged, was very narrow , all his flesh
and skin came off. He simply said 'thu thu' and his flesh and skin was
restored to him and turned into steel The two stones (with which the
hole had been covered], he carried home, and made two thrones ont of
i Thir figure representa in his person the three different colours of the world
Whilet according to the Sheh-version stang tha is wbite, Bar bisan red, and
Yog klu blue ; Bccording to this Lower Ladakbi version Tang lha is white, Bar
btsan red, and Yog klu black. This fact confirms toy gupposition that there iu
certain connection between the black and blog coloure in the Kegar Saga, and that
the realm of the black desil, which often appens to be separated from the three
realms of the world , originated out of that of the water-demons (Yog klu ). In the
Mongolian version of the Kearr Saga (I. J. Schmidt's translation) we find as rog.
pective colours white, yellow and black . This is another step further in the develop
ment of the colours. With regard to this I may add that, when converging on
mchod rton of white, red and blue colour with the Kardar of Lower Ladakh, this
gentleman told me that the red colour # 89 wrong, and that the mchod rten in the
middle onght to show the yellow colour, we is actually the 08.30 in & groap of three
mchod rten at saspola. This transition of the red colour into the yellow colour I
Am inclined to connect with the movement started by Tsongkhapa. Although this
reformer only tried to replace the red colour of the lama's robes by the yellow
ope, the idea seems to have developed, that the red colour is not a holy colour at
all, and ought to be exchanged for the yellow one. It is not only the system
of oolours, but a great many other instances, which speak in favor of a greater
antiquity of the Tibetan version of the Saga. At the present time a naruber of
Raggian folklorists Blow & tendency to derive European folklore from that of the
Mongoliang. Perhaps they are right ; but many Mongolian cales seem to have their
prototypes in Tibetantale . That even in Tibet we are probably not yet at the
fountain.bead, I have mentioned already.

67
them for his parents. According to his prayer the well of nectar ap
peared underneath the thrones, surrounded by fruit trees of all kinds.
Agu d Palle had tied a stone to the ear of one of his goats to be
reminded of dBangpa rgyabzhin 's promise. He forgot all the same; but
when his wife was milking the goat, and the stone hit against the
goat's cheek, 80 that the goat abied and spilt the milk , he knew
again and started for the opper kingdom of the gods. The king of
the gods was lying in the suashine. After dPalle had salated him
with due respect and offered a white riband, be asked if not a horse
could be sold to him . This was not the case, but he received a golden
fish as a bakhshish.
Then he went to the lower kingdom of the Nagag and found King
Logpo lying in the suvghine. To bim also a white riband was offered,
and IJogpo was asked if he could not sell a horse. This was not the
case, but Aga d Palle received a turquoise fish as a bakhshish.
Now d Palle went to the firm place in the middle, offered a white
riband to mother sKyabs bdun, and asked her if she could not sell him
alorse. She said, yes, if he would pay 4 Re. 8 Annas for each little
hair of the horse. Palle said that he had been a shepherd of goats,
aboop, horses, yaks aud oxen in gIring. Every one of those animals
had become 100 through his care. All of these animals and as much
silver as the mother would ask, he was ready to pay for the horse
&Ngorog pon pon . Then he received the horse.
Tben Agu d Palle mouuted the horse, girded a broken sword on his
1 Here again, in the two hunting-tales, we have two parallel tales, probably
belonging to two different versions, both of which are intended to show the mean
poas of Don grub's elder brothere. I wish to draw attention to the fact that
the Kesar myths (and other folklore also) are very fond of showing the parallel
ism of three members not only in verses of three lines, but also in talea of three
opcarrences. Because both of my Sheh-versions of the Kenar Saga speak of a
threefold contest of the son of the King of heaven, it is highly probable that this
Lower Ladakhi version also had the story of a threefold instead of a fourfold contest
origioally. The fourth tale of the contest is, however, the most important, as it
belongs to that group of taleg which tell of the turning of the hero's skin into steel
and similar bubutances. Compare I. A., list of additions, No. V.
Does this veraion of the Aga's purchasing a boree go back to the same source
Ma the report of Don grub's obtaining his honse from his red uncle (because mother
Tvabe bdun alno represents the red colour}; both these stories stand in nearly cor
rowponding places in the saga. Compare I. A . Springwyth, talo No. III, 22-25.--
Hero algo dPallo's relationship to silver &od the white colour (his whito ribanda)
oz. bo noticed. Compare I. A . Springmyth, tale No. VIII, 17-20.

88
loins and rode back to the country of the gods. There he met with
Don yod, Don idar and Dom grub's sister who was on the top of the roof.
He asked her, where the house of the king was. She answered : “ What
do you want to do with him ? (10 wherever you like!" The Aga
said : “ Do you know, who I am ? The horse is &Ngorog pon pon, the
man is dPalle roodpo, the sword in the sword stone-cutter.' This
sword was hardened by placing it for three years in ice, water and in
the ground. If you will not show me the house, I shall throw your
upper half into the sky, and your lover hall into the centre of the
earth !" Then the girl ran away and told her fathor, who know at
Once that the stranger was Ago d Palle. He went out and shook
hands with the Age d Palle blamed him for having told lies, but again
they agreed on sending Don grub after seven days.
5 .
Don grub wished to have a look at the giring-land , before going
there as King Kesar. He took the shape of a beautiful bird and de
sconded to Aga Khrai mgo khru thung's house. This Aga told his wife
to bring out his bow and to make hot water ready for the soup, they
were going to cook from the bird. But the bird flew away, leaving
some dang. The other Agas were kinder, and Aga Palle brought an
offering of food and pencil-cedats. When Don grub Arrived back in
heaven, his father asked his opinion on the g Ling-land, and Don grub
adswered that averything was alright, only Aga Khrai mgo khru thung
was a bad man.
6 and 7.
Then Don grub asked his father how he could go to the land of
gling without a mother, castle, horse, brother, bow and arrow, kettle,
gont, plough-os, protecting god and goddess, and without a wife. The
father said : “ Your mother will be Gog bzang Thamo, your castle the
gling-castle, your horse TK yang byung dbyerpa, your brothers ySer sbal
and yY* sbal, your arrow iTong dKar, your bow Gyad yahu of stoel,
your tool the ' Stone-catter,' your spear d Pal jan, your kettle Zangabu
Kha yon, your pot Kha dmar, your goat Ra skyes skye dmar, your plough .
ox Kang dikar, your protecting goddess Kur dman rgyalmo, and your
wife will be '6Brigno.
The lives of the children of the king of heaven wore bound to a
cup of milk each. The king ordered his dangbter to poor the milk
out of Don grub's cup, and at that very moment Don grub died .
I Here the tale of Don grud's death in heaven is entirely different from that of
the Sheh-Tortion. The belief that the lives of the ogrou are bound to certain things

09
Then a great storni went over the earth. At that time Aga
Pasang dan ra skyesl was weaving, and Gog bzang-lhamo was turning
her spindle ; each of them had a cup of tes before them . Into the
lady's cup fell a hail-atone, which the Agu advised her to eat, because
it was a gift from the gods apparently. After that she was with child.
When people began to gay that King Kesar would be born to Gog bzang
Ihamo, ber two younger siaters becane envious. They secrety tied one
of her pigtails to one of the iron dhearth-stones and sent a goat into the
room . Then they sliouted : “ Sister, turn the goat out of the room !"
Gog bzang lhamo robe to do so, tore the pigtail off her head, and upset
the milk . After that she got many ulcers.
On the day of birth the child cried from inside the mother : “ I
shall be born on the top of three hills. Go there and pnt ap three
stones and three beame, take coral sticks and porrl-white twigs and
dover [the house with roof-earth of butter and flour !” This the
mother did , and it said : " I am not the deer of the bills ! Go to three
valleys, and build a similar house !" Then she was told to build another
house on the shore of the lake, another one in the middle of the field ;
after that she was sent behind the door of ber bonge, then to the ele
vated place in her house. Then the child threatened her to come out
of ber hend, carryiug away some part of the head . Again the child
threatened the mother to come out between the ribe, or out of the sole
of the foot. Finally the child told the truth , saying : “ Bring an
offering of food and pencil-cedar, together with me many creatures will
be born !"
At first gun and moon were born and went ap to the sky, then
the wild goat, who went to the rock ; the lioness with the turquoise
mane, who went to the glacier ; the wild yas, who went to the
outaide their bodies, was applied here to the lives of the goda, Because it will be
interesting to compare the report of Don grub's outfit for the gLing-land with that
of the Sheh-version, I shall give the latter according to my falleet copy of the
Sheb vention in the appendix.
1 Agu Panung Idan ra skyes in his relation to Kesar's mother is the germ of
that extremely comic flgare, into which be developed in the Mongolian version,
wbere he is called Sanglun. I have made special equires about hiro ; but ao.
oording to the views of Ladakhis he has never been Gog bzang Thamo's husband,
although he wus often teased to have had something to do with her.
. For comparison I give specimen verses from the Sheh-version, which refer
to the same roene; in the appendix. That the Bheh-versiona also have slightly differ
Gnt creatures, is shown in the I. A. lint of additiobe, No. 3. In the I. A. I made
* mistake, saying, that all the creatures were born at the place where the little
house was built. They were born in Gog brang lhamo's house, and went through
the pindow to the places prepared by the mother.

70
meadows; the eagle, who went to the top of the hill; the fish golden-oyo,
who went to the lako; the little bird, who went upon a tree ; and all
the treasures and the cattle, which dBangpo ngyabahin had prophecied.
After all this also a large head with a small neck , like a lizard, was
born. The mother put some buckwheat-flour in its month, and a large
stone on it. Then bKur dmanmo came. When she heard a voice
withont seeing a body, she asked the mother : " What sort of a child
was born to you ? " Gog bzang lhamo said : “ Many creatures were
boru to me, but went out through the wiodow. After all of them a
lizard was born to me, who 'is now anderneath the stone !” bKur
dmanmo scolded the mother and lifted the stone. Underneath it she
Baw the child which had taken the shape of the godly King Kesar.
8 .
When the hail was falling, some bail-stones fell on the 
treasures
and creatures, which Aga dPalle bed brought from the castle Paci
dpal dong. They all became preguant together with mother Gog bsang
Thamo. On the day of Kesar'a birth algo to these croatares children
were born : To the pot with the red mouth - a pot with a long neck ;
to the kettle with the crooked mouth - 8 kettle with a broken mouth ;
to the white moon-axema steel-eze; to the many-coloured rope - A rope
of a yard in length ; to the white bag Hold thousand '- a bag of many
colours ; to the mare Thsa langs- Kyang rgod dbyerpa ; to the Dxo
with crooked horns— the Dzo White foot'; to the white goat- the goat
Red neck ;' to the sheep Dromo-- the sheep Porze ; to the a88 Black
with a white moath '- brown ass ; to the white bitch - the yellow
hound ; to the black cat - A cat of many colonrs.
9.
Then an offering was erected from the flour which had been given
to the lizard, and Ane bKur dmanmo sang & lallaby and a hymn to the
1 In the appendix two specimen verses, referring to the same soone in the
Sbeh-version, are given. That the list of creatures is not quite the same in both
versions is proved by list of additions No. 2. (Indian Antiquary).
As we have seen, also the Lower Ladakhi version of the Kenar saga is in pos
Repaion of two different tales regarding the population of the earth with animals, etc.
Compare No. 7 sud No. 8 abovo. According to No. Tit is Gog bxang Thamo who
produces everything ; according to No. 8 it is the castle Pact (pal dong, which con
tained everything. Here we may either have two entirely different versions of the
Arme tale ; or one of them (perhaps No. 8) may belong to the ancient sooount of the
first creation of the world , and the other (perhape No. 7) may be the account of the
re-creation and ro-population of the world in spring every year,

71
land of the gods, the earth, and the land of the Nagag. Then she
returned the child to the mother and advised her not to give the child
into anybody's hands.
Agn bka blon Idanpa, the son of the devil lHa cin , whose apper
balf was like a devil and whose lower balf yng like that of a man of
gLing, said to all the Sharrandre barandrs of the East that King Kesar
of gling was born to Gog bzang lhamo, and that they must bring him
at once and throw him into the fire, because later on Kesar would do
them great harm . Then the bad Agu went to the South .
Those Sharrandre barandre took the shape of lamas and went to
Gog bzang thamo's house. They accepted neither flour nor butter, but,
asked for the child to teach it religion. They promised to return it
after seven days. When they had gone, they called together all the
boys, girls and emitha of g Ling and told them to bring thorng, batter
(for burning ) and nails. After everything had arrived, the nails were
fastoned in four directions [to hold the ropes with which the child was
bound), the thorns were thrown on a bear, and the child was placed in
the middle of it. Then Ane b Rur dmanmo, taking the shape of dkar
thigma, wont to see what was being done with the child. When sho
saw the child in the middle of the fire, ebe criad and said : " It is the
custom of all men to give floar to beggars; Gog bzang Thano gave the
child instead. How shall I get the child back ? " The child angwered,
that, although the stars were well protected by sun and moon, the
young lions by the ice-lion, the young deer by the old wild goat, the
little fishes by their parents, he liad lost father and mother. “ But tlie
four chains are a sign, that the four gLing will be subdued by me:
The fire only warms my hands, the batter serves to anoint them
Now look, my mother, and all you boys and girls of gLing ! I shall
throw the three Sharandre barrandre into the fire. I shall jump like a
lion ! " Tbis he did , and all people ran away from fear. Then he and
Kar thigmo went home again.
Although it is quite in accordance with the general ideas of natare-mythology.
that the pan, the moon, the raiobow and the cloud bare obildren (becauge the ean
of the second day may be called the child of the raw of the first day), the names
of the children se given in No. 8 : a pot with long neck, a steel-Aze, eto., look
more like the names of praotioal instraments. This development from the parable
to the practical imploment which had been bred for comparison, is not quite in .
opnoeivable, it we keep in mind that also Xonar probably was the personification of
s power of nature, before he became huntained in the course of time.
1 This very samo hymn is song at epery wedding feast at Khalatne, when threo
pieces of the wedding onko are thrown towards the aky, ovor the earth and down.
Ward

72
10 .
Before the child was born to Gog beang thamo, she was emitten with
leprosy. One day the child said to her : " If you wish to get your
hair washed, you must not go to the house of another woman, but tell
another woman to come here. Otherwise a thief might come, whilst
I shall go for some wood. But the mother went to some other woman ;
and the child ran bome et once, hid everything and pat some grain
mixed with sand on a broken clay-pot. Then he went to the bills for
wood. When he came home with & load, he called his mother and
blamed her for having gone away, because a thief had plainly come.
* But now let me have some food ! " As there was nothing else left,
be asked his mother to parch the grain mixed with sand on his hand,
for there was no other veggel. The mother proposed to use her own
Hand instead of the child 's, and when hers was filled with the red-hot
grain, he seized it and did not allow ber to open it natil she would tell
him who was his facher. The mother said that she really did not
know , and that he had better go to the teacher Tee dgu, to ask him
abont it. Then he let lier hand go. It had become one great burning
wound ; but when the child said kuha and onregged it, it healed at once,
and her body became entirely free from leprosy.?
It strikes me that Gog bsang lhamo ia suffering from leprosy before and after
the birth of thous maay Oleatares, and that she is healed by means of heat. This
looks like a parable for 4001 being removed by the an. Bat the story, as we have
it now , is little too fall to be original in all ite parte. That it is winter before the
birth of Keanr, is indioated alao by the fact that dBangpo rgya behis and Logpo are
lying in the Bunahine. Ladakhis do that only during winter.

73
APPENDIX TO ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS.
Specimen verses from the Sheh .rersion , which have not yet been
quoted in full.
According to the fullest copy of the Shell-version , Don grub's outfit
for the gLing-land is the following :
pha lhe skyer rdzong snyappo Accept skyer rdzong snyanpo as
Anams your paternal deity.
ma lba bkur dman rgyalmo anams AcceptbKur dman rgyalmo as
your maternal deity.
tharra rkyang byung dbyerpa Accept the foal Kyang byung
BRAIDS dbyerpa,
log ngo shespai rta zhig yin It is a horse tbat always ku10ws
the way back.
* aphurla mkhaspai rta shig yiu It is a horse that knows to fly .
adigpai grigu sor ysum spams Accept the knife three fingera
long ' for the giuful,
edigpala btangbai gri zhig yin It is a kuife to stab the sinful
Accept the shell-knife for
sang: rgyas dunggi picag snams 
Buddba,
sange rgyasla btangbai gri zhig It is a kuife to stab Buddha.
yin
yzbu ai brio yzhu angonmo goams Accept the blue bow Srin yahu,
mdā ni rang log thubpa yin The bow , whose arrow flies back
again.
brivpo thamscd btulzana When sobduing all the ogres,
arinmo tbamscad grogsla ‘agºg Call the female ogres to thy help.
bya Kbyung krung nyima blulzana When gnbduing the bird Khyung
krung, the sun,
byamo dkarmo grogala 'ngug Call the white bird (the moon) to
thy help .
hor gar dkar rgyalpo btulzana Wher subduing king Gur dkar of
Hor,
mgar rtea chos sgrol grogala 'agug Call tlie smith's lady Chos agrol to
thy lielp.
"ndio lha bisan bog btulzata When subduing 'a Dre lha bisan
bog,
For mon, who do not wish to meet with a statement of aniversity to Buddhism
in the formatie
in the Ladakbi Kenar myths, it is most easy to Bay that such lire were simply in
Yonted by Mr. Francke, Here you have Buddha Again . The above song was
diotated by Zarra, daughter of Natshab 4li, of Sheh. She is still alive and young,
sod may be ezamined by everyone who tako, un interest in the Regarsaga.
10

dzems ºbamza “abam skyid glovely Call Dzero 'abamza 'abom sky to
'agug thy help.
Ron btsan khromo btolzan When subduing Ron btsan khromo,
shel lcam 'a Brugmo grogala 'agug. Call the crystal wife 'a Brugmo to
thy 
help.
Specimen verses from the birth Atory according to the Sheb version,
liat of additions No. 3 :
The child saya from inside the mother; according to MS. I :
Amala skye skye pi Being born to the mother,
nám stod mthóla skye yin I shall be born on the high zenith
Dámstodla skyéces ni [Althougla] being born on the high
zenith ,
ngi zla yoyisko pi nga mán Yet I am not son and moon.
And so on through all the different creatures.
Or according to M $. II :
Ngá 'adirú mi skye I shall not be born here,
rmiogóra skyó yin I shall be born on the top of the bill.
ríi mgóla skyéste
 [Although ) being born on the bill.
top,
shává ridrags ni oga mán Yet I am not a deer.
And so on through all the different creatures.
Specimen verses from the birth story according to the Sheh ver
sion, list of additions No. 2. When the hail came, Agu d Palle Baid :- -
mi thoangmas kha shor rgyabs All men ran away,
gogza lhamo gbulla lus
 Gog za lhamo remained back ,
d Palle pga mi 'adug Itala chon I, dPalle, am not (at home), I
shall go to look after her).
rta theangmas kba shor rgyabe All horses ran away,
rgodma thsalangs ghalla lus The mare Thsa langs remained
back ,
dPalle nga mi'adug Itala chen. 
I, dPalle, am not [at home), I
shall go to look (after her ].
And so on through all the different creatures .
VOCABULARY AND COMMENTS.
CERIT rnol, = 
onol gyag, a 
fight.
251 phed, – phyed, half.

hitlog, = playithog, evening.
yyogcas, to cover ; here in tlie senso ' to spin,' covo
the spindle atick.
skal ngari, = ngaranggi, uns.
| rayug = ra lyng, sling to throw stones at gonts.
ong anthil, sling to tlurow stones at donkeye.
2 khyi ljug, sling to tlırow stones at dogs.
| 'ajuymu, or 'ajugring, oblong.
tumpa, piece, fragment,
ar btsan, tlie firm place in the middle,' tlie earth.
na skyabs Vduma, mother ' seven helps';
name of the goddess of the earth, instead of bdunma, mdunina also
occurg.
Jogspo, is probably Cogpo, the lower one' ; name of
the king of the någag. An exactly parallel case is ljam iostead of lcum
for spouse.'
* *** skyer rlcony snyanpo, the well-sounding (speaking)
companion of men '; a name of the father of the gods.
kur dan rgyalmo, the respectable godly
wife.' Name of the mother of the gods.
galaika spalmai astag, 'the glorious village'; astag
is probably the same as asta, a part of the village. .
15 * 981 shi chu rabs, the ford sbi; name of the principal of
fords ; sli is probably spi or spyi, principal. This ford and the village
were probably forgotten in the account of the creation of gLing, see
fasc. No. 1.
pro thun ; bere the name shows an rin addition, it seems
to mean 'higli jos.'

76
I shelljam ' abruguma, (Ijum = loam ), the crys
tal wife ' a Bruguma. It is interesting, that here the name appeals
again in the form of' a Bruguma, instead of a Briguma. My translation
of this pame as little grain ' or seed ' is not so very improbable, if we
consider, that Dong yeum mila also originated from the grains of the
tree.
giornal ldem mkhar, is said to be the store-room of the castle,
(where all the treasures brought from a Pal dong castle were stored ap).
O'59' curulugu, name of the giant (devil) in the north
ysangma, meal.
nyerang, = nyidrang, you, respoctful address.
athammo, > 'atbabmo, fight,
1951 menna, E ma yinna, if this bo not (the case).
AGENT bzhangs, = bahenge, riee.
wa 21501 yodpinba, was ; the termination ba is ased here in a
similar songe as the emphatic article.
btang chad , a promise to give.
5911 drag, Lower Ladakhi for rag, to feel, perceive.
3.
rgyallog, win ; another case of the present tonge in
og.
tongtee, = dong, quiser,
231 diu, arrow -blade.
J l skarcas, to put on ; (the arrow -blade on the arrow
otick ),

77
bsag stag, * hsag silag, qnirer.
Agro 1 bsdrcas, = silulpa, collect.
cara yongspa, came ; the participle nlone is used here to ei.
press the past, as bas been the case in other sentences Alko.
3625951 nyung, dkar, * yungs dkar, mustard,
T= 1 sragpa, = sregpa, partridge.
Ba | khyezha, = Ahyed cag, you.
GAMINT rtsalcas, seek ; compare perfect tense of 'athsolba. The
gu may be due to the b of the forme btsol and btsal.
51 251 de, 'adi, that, this ; these pronouns are always placed
before the word to which they belong, contrary to the usage of Central
Ladakh. They are often furnished with the termination of the genitive.
The latter I have taken off again, because the spoken language does not
confirm this usage of the genitive.
khrasug, - klrabo, mady-coloured.
59591 | don tag, = don, meaning, business.
771 sribcig, auddenly, a short time; srib means 'darknegr,'
originally. The above meaning of sribcig is to be explained in this way
When the eye is covered by the eye-lid, it is dark for a moment. Thus
it means literally, within the twinkling of the eye.'
batrag, bathag, root.
snasogs, = sna thsogs, different,
ANG UNINV5 | bsauces pasang, ‘better than killing '; this com .
parative in pasang seems to throw some light on the development of the
comparative in sang. Here 'ang, also, may have been - ded to the
comparative in pas. Then tbe first part of the ending pasang was lost
and sang only remained.

78
zng zag, rough, oneven, (like a rapp ).
$ 982 spagspa, = pagopa, skin.
menne, = ma yinnas, besides.
upen, a high monarch.
VII Langsbu, throne; perhaps related to yılen, throue.
TNT cuncas, surrouud.
w as ambiti, all sorts of fruit.
58 phrulu, frait.
Så¥ 1 ona mi sna thsang, very different.
591 huyu, exclamation to express tirednese.
O carag, & stone which is fastened to the ear of a goat or
sheep, to remind you of a certain thing ; like the knot in the handker
chief.
15021651 ltsangmkhan, beggar.
HT99551 rimpa bzhindu, slowly.
སྒྲ་ཅེས། •gམce , to bor.
Q AGAI lam bcugs, kakliohish ; literally " to put (you) on
the way.'
391 nyag, each single one.
means 6 x 12 annan, i.e., 4 rupee, so I am told.
ango rog pon pon, blue black with a corled mane,
name of a Palle': borbe.

79
KATETT chagpo, broken ; adjective formed from 'achagpa.
I chon chan, in vain.
3 gange ngar, the audden placing of lot iron into
{ ཆུ་ར ch༧ ཀgམr, Sice, water or earth , to barden it.
* * sa ngar, .
ha skyeces, - kha kyeces, to scol. .
lag 'aphrad, abake hands; this is not a Tibetan custom ;
but is observed in Purig and Baltistan.
tangstena , giving ; in Lower Ladaklı ve often ineet
with an additional na after a gerund ,
a skor, go about to see something.
| A short yard ; occurs in the name of the falcon ; it seems
to indicate that the bird is not quite of the size of a yard.
As will have been noticed , the dinlect of tliis version is not always
pare. Lower Ladakhi formg which are at the base of the whole, are
mixed with Central Ladakhi and classical foring. This was apparently
* done with a view to let its language appear a little more cultured.
I ndo ltog. a pot made of serpentine stone.
, imperative tense of bkalces, to load.
@50151 yahidmad, = yzhismad, wife, family.
TO kalcor, the little pieces of butter which are smeared
round the rim of a beer-pot, to honour a guest.
imperative tense of rances, to smear, to direct; perhaps
related to 'adrenpa.

80
aljan, - dpalcan, having glory .
MR Ker zong, = skyer rdrongs ; name of the father of tlie
Puls, who often officiates as a paternal deity only.
Do the different panes of the same god develop into different goda ?
Kha zub, or kha sbub, = kha bub, with the mouth turned
downwarde.
5575 denna mala , in that very sanie moment.
7.
51531 seruru, = serba, liail.
ru skyes, instead of ru skyes ; rva has become divided into
two words, ra and ra , both meaning the same.
3 puri ' athulcas, to work with the shuttle
5 *9811 thrucas, = 'akhrudpa , wash.
yen , + skye yin, will be bora .
5 towa, or to, exclamation
4731851 gral chad, roof-laths.
sbilab, perhaps spyilab, twigs of the Tibetan roof.
SNĮ skyorcas, pnt up in a circle.
Ta thog grab, twigs of the roof.
| zhinggi ama, “mother of the field,' name of the lark.
59T5AT | rtagtagpa, the elevated place in a room .
rtsigma, rtsibma, rib ; but in the next lino thoro iq trib sha,
hesh near the ribs.

81
et mithsom , = mthso, lake.
skyin chon ba rgan, the ' big ' wild goat, the old or,
name of the wild goat, born to Gog bzang lhamo.
G a rga sengga yyu ral can,' tho ‘lion with the turquoiso
locks '; name of the lion, born to Gog bzang ihamo.
RSS Thara f 'abrong chen khamba, tho ‘large and brown wild
yak '; name of the yak, born to Gog bznng thano.
bya rgyal rgolpo, the 'wild bird king '; laine of the
engle, born to Gog bzang thamo.
myamo yser mig, the fish goldon eye '; namo of
the fish, born to Gog bzang lhamo.
8.
sa ina athal, the mcasare not boing full; iu classical
language ma sadde.
54911 thsig, air-brick.
ENI skye rings, 'long neck '; namo of the pot, boru to
Degbu kla dmar.
A551 kha chod, 'broken mouth '; dams of tho kottle, born to
Zungabu kha yon.
Fra 1851 stopn xong chod, the axe entting by itsolf'; naruc cf
the axe bora to stari claba dkarpo.
GATSE915 | thagbu khru gang, thoʻropo ono full yard [in longtlı)';
name of the ropo, born to thagpa rgya slag.
had khrabo, the 'many-coloured bag ; name of the bag,
born to Cyeno dkarnoi stong shong.
rkyang rgod byerpa, ' the gonuino wild kiang,
name of Kesar's horse, born to l'hsa langs.
11

82
TESTAT mdro pho rkang dkar, the "white-footed Dzo '
Game of the Dzo, born to m Dromo ru yon.
SNN53 ra skyes skye dmar, the 'kid red-neok ; ' name of
the kid, born to Rama dkarmo.
B a | lug porze, the sheep golden month ;' name of the
sheep, born to Ing dromo.
bongbu khamba ; the brown donkey'; name of the
donkey, born to Nagpo kha dkar.
| hyi pho yser lings, the 'golden hound ' ; name
of the dog, born to Khyimo dkarmo.
arsyu bila khra sug, the 'many-coloured cat'; name of the
oat, born to Bila nagpo.
tha phrug kun, the children of the gods; although only
One child is born, the ploral sigu kun is used. Should this be a biga of
respect ?
ET theo jo, aristocratic 
offspring.
QA T “akhurrena = 'akhurcosua, in carrying [the child ].
para os 5 pollo , mchalilo, the addition of o in both
words is due to the tune of the song.
Bagatell 'adompa, dangerous.
In the MS. the gerund ia bai is often used , which I have not yet
observed in ordinary language. In some places I have changed it to
bas, in others I have crosaed it out.
abarrandre barandro, this is the Lower
Ladakhi pronzaciation of sharri andhe bandhe. In many cases a distinct
r is sounded after dentals in Lower Ladakh in such words which do not
Buggest any r in Central Ladakh. -- A banhe is a lama who has not yet
been to Lhassa .

83
bund tha cin (perhaps yoir ); the devil, urine of
the gode ' name of a devil, bka blon Idanpa's father.
978211 snyad btool, temptation, attempt.
aca, we; Lower Ladakhi for ngacag, ngazha.
AINI skyilces, to detain, hinder.
pa yrigsmo, spectacle.
obochen , will go; termination of the future tense ; the MS. of.
ten has con instead of chen. I am inclined to believe that these two
terminations have to be differentiated, cken = cha yin , will go, is the ter
mination of neater verbs. Oen is probably contracted from bco yin , will
do, and in the termination of active verbe.
1986 | stances, to long after.
1 lag skud, emearing the band (with oil.]
As regards the number of the Andhe bandho, we find three as
well as seven in the same version .
10 .
ARTII 'akhrustena, when you will get your bair washed .
*8 | lhacas, to plait ; from sleba.
1951 logpa, the goat-skin, worn by men and women .
MATT|| Kag chag, potslerd.
581 hasa, tender.
Bareil nallu , = nalbu, = bastard.
I chol sgang, a wound caused by fire.
a l 'agro, = dro of the dubitative voice.

*o. 1.
དེ་ནས་ཨ་མ་ལ་ཤིང་རེ་དང་ཆུ་རེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། ཕྲུ་ག་དེ་མེ་མེ་བློ་དཔོན་
རྩེདག་ལ་ཨ་བ་འདྲི་བ་ལ་སོང། མེ་མེ་བློ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགས་མི་མང་པོ་ལ་རིའི་རྩྭ་
ཇ་བཅུག་གིན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་མི་ཀུན་ལ་མེ་མེས་ཟེརས། འདི་རིང་འདི་
རུ་མི་ཞིག་ཡོང་ཆེན། ཁོ་ལ་ཅང་མ་ཟེར་བ། ངའི་རྩ་ཡོང་བཅུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། མེ་མེ་
མཚམས་ཁང་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་སོང་བ་དང། དེ་ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་རུ་རྩྭ་ཇ་ས་རུ་བསླེབ་པ།
མི་ཚང་མས་ཟ་ཅེས་ཟའད་ཚུག། མི་ཚང་མས་ཁོ་ལ་ཟ་ཅེས་ཁམ་བུ་རེ་བཏུངས་པ།
ཁོས་ཟ་རྫུན་བཏང་ངན་ཞིག་ཕུ་ཐུངས་ནང་དུ་སྦས་ཏེ་བོརས། ཕྲུ་གས་གསེར་སྒྲུང་
ཞིག་ལ་སྐུད་པ་བཏགས་སེ། ཕུར་བཅུག་གིན་ཞིག་བོརས་པ། དི་མི་ཞིག་གིས་
ཟེརས། 
གསེར་སྦྱང་པོ་ངས་གཅིག་འཁར་ཡིན་ཟེརས། ཕྲ་གུས་སྦྲང་བུ་
འབུད་དེ་ཆ་ན། 
ཁྱོ་རང་ལ་འདྲ་ཡིན། སྦྱང་བུ་སྟོར་ན། ངས་འདྲ་འཁར་
ཡིན་ཟེར་རེ། ཁོས་ནེན་དེ་ཁྱོངས་པ། སྦྲང་བུ་སྟོར་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་གུས་
སྙད་བཏང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར། །
ཁྱོང་ལྔ་བྱོང་ངའི་གསེར་སྦྱང་དེ་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
ཁྱོང་ལྔ་ཁྱོང་བའི་གཡུ་སྦྱང་དེ་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
ང་ཐང་ལ་ཆེ་ན་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ང་སྐོམ་པ་རིག་ཆ་ན་ཨ་རག་བདུད་རྩི་ཡིན་ལོ།

gt;
ང་ལྕོགས་པ་རིག་ཆ་ན་ཞིམ་ཟིག་མངར་ཆུ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ང་སུན་པ་རིག་ཆན་སི་སྙན་གླིང་བུ་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ངའི་གསེར་སྦྲང་མ་མྱོང་ན་ང་ཁྱོ་རང་ང་རྩ་ཤི་ཡིན་ལོ།
ངའི་གཡུ་སྦྲང་མ་ཁྱོང་ན་ངའི་སྲོག་ཁག་བཀལ་ཡིན
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་མི་དེ་གོང་རྩ་འཐམ་སྡེ་འཛོང་མོ་བཏངས་པ། མི་ཚང་
མས་ཟེརས། 
ཁྱོ་རང་ལ་ང་ཞེས་ཟ་ཅེས་མང་པོ་བཏུངས་པ་ཡིན། དེ་ཚང་མ་
ལོག་སྟེ་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། 
ཁོས་ཕུ་ཐུངས་སི་ནང་ནས་ཟ་ཅེས་ཕིང་སྟེ། ཚང་མ་
ལ་རང་རང་གིས་བཏངས་མཁན་གྱི་ཁམ་བུ་རང་རང་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་བཏངས
། དེ་ནས་
མི་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཟེར་ཐབས་ཅང་མ་ཡོངས་པ་སང། ཕྲུ་ག་དེ་ལ་ཚང་མས་ཇུ་ཟེར་ཏེ།
ང་ཞ་ལ་མེ་མེ་སིས་ཆང་ཟ་མ་ཞིག་དང་ར་ཐོང་ཞིག་འཁྱོང་ཆེན
། དེ་ཁྱོ་རང་ལ་
བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཁ་ཆད་བཅོས། དེ་ནས་ཚ་བིག་འགོར་དེ་ན། མེ་མེ་སིས་
ཆང་ཟ་མ་གཅིག་དང་ར་ངོ་གཅིག་ཁྱོངས་པ་སང། དེ་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་ཐོབ། མི་ཚང་
མ་ལ་ཟ་ཅེས་ཉ་ངུན་སོང་སྟེ། རྩྭ་ཇ་མ་ཐུབ་པ་ལུས་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་གུས་ཟླ་
ལུས་ན། ཁོང་ལ་མེ་མེ་སི་ཁ་སྐྱེ་ཡིན། ཁོང་སྡིག་པ་བསམ་སྡེ་། སྨོན་ལམ་
བཏབས། 
རྩ་ཁྲུལ་ལ་ཁ་ཚང་མ་རྔ་སྟེ་རླུང་པོ་ལ་སྐུ་བཅུག་སྟེ་མེ་མེ་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་
འདྲེན་དེ་བསླེབ་བཅུགས། དེ་ནས་མི་ཚང་མ་ཡ་མཚན་སོང་སྟེ། མང་པོ་
འཐད་སོང། ཕྲུ་གུས་ནང་དེ་མཐུངས། ར་གོང་དེ་ཁྲིད་དེ་མེ་མེ་མཚམས་ཁང་
གི་དཀར་ཁུང་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། མེ་མེ་ལ་མཐོང་བཅུག་སྟེ། ར་མ་བསད་པ་
གྲི་ཡིངས་པས། མེ་མེ་ལ་མཐོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཝ་ཕྲུ་གུ། ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་ར་མ་
བསད་ན། ངའི་མདུན་ལ་མ་བསད། ཕག་ཅིག་ལ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་སོད་ཟེརས་པ།

ཕྲ་ག་དེས་ཟེརས། མེ་མེ་རང་གིས་ངའི་ཨ་བྲ་སྟོན། ངའི་ཨ་བྲ་མ་བསྟན་ན།
ར་ཐོང་དེ་མེ་མེ་རང་གི་མདན་ལ་བསད་ཡིན། ང་ལ་མི་ཚང་མས་ཨ་བ་མེད་
མཁན་ནི་ནལ་བུ་ཟེར་འདུག་ཞུས་པ། མེ་མེས་ཟེརམ། ཁྱོ་རང་གི་ཨ་བ་ངས་
མི་ཤེས། ཐང་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་གི་ཁ་གེ་ཡོར་དཀར་ནག་དམར་གསུམ་ཡོད། ཁྱོ་རང་
དེར་སོང་སྟེ་ཐེ་ཡོར་ལ་འདྲིས། དེ་ཐི་ཡོར་གྱི་ནང་ནས་དབུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་བྱུང་
སྡེ་ཁྱོ་རང་ང་ཨ་བ་བསྟན་ཡིན་མོལ་པ[ ཕྲ་གས་ར་མ་ཕུད་དེ། ཐང་ཆེན་མོ་
ཡོད་ས་རུ་སོང་བ། དེ་རུ་མེ་མེ་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཐེ་སྐོར་ཞིག་གི་ནང་དུ་ཞུག་
སྡེ་འདུགས་པ། ཕྲུ་གུ་དེར་བསླེབ་སོང། འདྲིས་པ། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཐང་གི་ཐང་སྟོད་ན་ཐེ་ཡོར་དཀར་པོ་ཁྱོད་ཉོན་དང།
ཐང་གི་ཐང་དཀྱིལ་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ཐོ་ཡོར་དམར་པོ་ཉོན་དང།
ཐང་གི་ཐང་མཇུག་གི་ཐེ་ཡོར་ནག་པོས་ད་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ང་ནི་ཕ་མེད་ཕྲུ་ག་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
རིའི་ཤ་བ་ཀུན་ལ་ཡང་ཨ་བྲ་འདུག་ལོ།
ཨ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཕྲུ་ག་ཞིག་གར་ཡང་མེད་ལོ།
ང་ལ་ཨ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཁས་དམན་ཆེན་པོ་འདུག་ལོ།
ངའི་ཨ་བྲ་གར་ཡོད་བསྟན་རོགས་མཛད་ལོ།
ཁོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཐེ་ཡོར་གྱི་ནང་ནས་གཏོམ་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཁྱོད་ཕ་མེད་ཕྲ་གས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཁྱོད་ཕ་མེད་གེ་སར་གྱིས་ཐེ་ཡོར་ང་ལ་གསན་དང།
ཁྱོ་རང་གི་ཨ་བ་གླང་གི་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་ཡོད་ལོ །

87
པ་སང་ལྡན་ར་སྐྱེས་ཁྱོ་རང་གི་ཨ་བ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱོ་རང་མགྱོགས་པ་གྲང་གི་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་སོང་
ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཨ་བ་མན་ན་མེད་པས། དེ་ཟུག་གི་རྫུན་བཏངས་པ་སང།
དེ་གྲང་གི་ལུང་པའི་རི་ལྕོགས་ཀྱི་རྩྭ་ཤིང་ནགས་ཚལ་ཚང་མ་ལ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་མེ་
བདུགས་ཏེ་སོང་སྟེ། ནག་པོ་གྱུར་སོང། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གྱིས་དེ་ནགས་ཁྲོད་
ཚང་མ་ལ་སྡིག་པ་ཚོར་ཟེརས། འདི་རྩ་ཤིང་ནགས་ཚལ་ཚང་མ་སྔོན་མའི་
མཚོགས་སོང་ཤིག་ཟེར་ཏེ་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་བཏབས་པ། སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་ཁོལ་བཏང་
སྟེ་སྔོན་པོ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོ་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་སོང་པ་སང། པ་སང་ལྡན་རུ་སྐྱེས་
དེ་ཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོ་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ངའི་ཨ་བ་ཇུ་ལེ་ཟེརས་པ།
པ་སང་ལྡན་རུ་སྐྱེས་ཀྱིས་མིག་དེ་བཙུམ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ང་ལ་ཨ་བྲ་ཟེར་མཁན་དེ་
སུ་ཡིན། ད་ཚུག་པ་ང་ལ་བུ་ཚ་ཞིག་མེད་པ། ཁྱོད་ག་ནས་ཡོངས་ཟེརས་པ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ན་ཡང། ཀྱེ་སར་གྱིས་པ་སང་ལྡན་རུ་སྐྱེས་ལ་དབང་བཅོ་སྟེ། ཤིང་
མང་པོ་ཞིག་བཀལ་ཏེ་སྣ་ལོ་གདག་སྡེ་ཁྲིད་དེ་ཁྱོང་སྡེ་ཁང་པ་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་
ནས་ཨ་མ་ལ། ཨ་མ་ལེ་ངའི་ཨ་བྲ་ཐོབ་སོང་ཟེརས་བ། ཨ་མ་ཡང་འཐད་སོང།།
No. 2.
དེ་ནས་བུ་ཚས་ཨ་བྲ་དང་ཨ་མ་གཉིས་ཀ་དྲི་མོ་དགུ་ཆོད་ཟེར་མཁན་གྱི་
ལུང་པའི་ནང་ལ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་ཨ་མ་ལ། ངའི་ཨ་མ་ལེ། ཨ་བ་དེ་ཤོར་ཏེ་ཆ་མ་
བཅུག། ཟེར་ཏེ་ཁོ་རང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོངས་པ། གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་
ཚང་ཀ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་མཁར་དང་ཡུལ་ལི་ཞིང་ཚང་མ་རང་རང་ལ་སྒོ་ཅེས་སི་ཕི་ལ་
ལུང་པ་ཞིག་གི་ནང་དུ་འདུ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་ཚོར་ཏེ། ཁོ་ཡང་དེ་

a8
ལུང་པའི་ནང་ལྷ་ལ་སོང་བས། ཁོས་མི་ལ་མི་ཤེས་ཆས་བཅོ་སྟེ། གྲུབ་པ་
ཞིག་བཙོསྟེ་སོང། ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་དེ་ལམ་ན་རྡ་ཞིག་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་ཆའད་ཚུག།
ཁོས་ཨ་གུ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཨ་བ་་ལེ། ཉེ་རང་རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་འདུག། ང་འགྲུལ་
དེ་ངལ་ཅེསརག་ཟེརས་བ། ཨ་གུས། ཁྱོ་རང་ངལ་ན། ངའི་སྒྲུབ་ལ་རྟའི་
ཁ་ཞོན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཁོ་རྡམ་འཕོངས་ལ་བཏོངས། དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་ག་དེས་ཤིག་ཁྲི་ཚོ་གཅིག་
ཕིང་སྟེ། ཨ་གུའི་གཟུགས་པོའི་ཁ་བཏངས་པ། ཨ་ག་དེ་ལ་ཤིག་གིས་
ཟོས་ཏེ་སྨྱོན་པ་མཚོགས་སོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ལྔ་ཕྲུ་ག། ཁྱོ་རང་ནུར་དགོས།
ཤིག་མང་པོ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ང་ལ་མང་པོ་འབྱར་སོང་ཟེརས་པ། བདེན་བདེན་ང་
དམྱལ་བ་ཅན་ལ་ཤིག་ཡོང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཁོ་འགྲུལ་དེ་སོང་། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་དཔའ་
བོ་ཚང་མ་ཡོད་ས་རུ་བསླེབ་སོང།།
དེར་བསླེབ་ཟ་ན། མཁར་ཞིང་ཚང་མ་སྒོའད་ཚུག། ཁོས་ཨ་གུ་ཀུན་
ལ་ཞུས་བ། ཨ་ག་ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ནོ། ང་ལ་ཡང་ས་སྤྱོད་ཉ་ངུན་ཞིགབསྩལ་
དགོས་རྫུ་ཞུས་པ། ཨ་ག་ཀུན་ནིས་གྲབས་བཅོ་སྡེ་ཁོ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོ་རང་ལ་
རོ་འཁྱེར་ཅེས་སི་རོ་སྣ། བག་མ་འཁྱེར་ཅེས་སི་བགསྣ། སྦི་ཆུ་རབས་སི་
རབས་འགོ། གྲོ་མ་ཐང་གི་ཐང་འགོ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་འཐད་དེ་
ངལ་དེ་ཟུག་བསུལ་ན་གྲིག། ཨ་ག་པ་ཇུ་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཞག་ཅིག་མི་ཞིག་
ཤིབས། ཁོ་དེ་རུ་སོང་སྟེ་རོ་འཁྱེར་བའི་རོ་སྣ་ང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། གོན་ཅེས་སོ་མ་
ཞིག་གོན་ཏེ་རོ འི་སྔོན་ལ་གླུ་བཏང་ཛིན་ཞིག་སོང། དེ་ནས་མི་ཚང་མས་ཟེརས།
ཝ་མོ་ངན་གྱི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག། ང་ཞ་ཚང་མ་ལ་མི་ཤི་སྟེ་ཚོར་ཀ་ཡོད། དེ་ཟུག་ཅིག་
མ་ཟེར་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོས་གླུ་མང་པོ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་མི་ཤི་མཁན་ནི་བདག་

89
པོས་ཁོ་ལ་ནོར་མང་པོ་བཏངས་པ། ཁོརྩུབ་བཅད་དེ་སོང། ཡང་ཞག་ཅིག་
བག་མ་ཞིག་འཁྱེར་རད་ཚུག། ཡང་ཁོ་དེ་རུ་སོང་སྟེ་བག་མའི་སྔོན་ལ་ངུ་རིན་
ཞིག་ཀུ་ཅོ་བཏངས་པས། དེ་མི་ཚང་མས་ཟེརས། ཝ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག །
དེ་ཟུག་མ་ཟེར། བག་མ་ཞིག་འཁྱོང་ན། རྩེས་དང་གླུ་བཏང་ན། ངུ་མ་ངུ་
ཟེརས་པ། ཁོ་ཡང་ཐེབ་མང་པོ་ངུས ། དེ་ནས་ཡང་བག་མ་ཁྱོང་མཁན་ནི་
བདག་པོས་ནོར་མང་པོ་བཏངས་པ། ཅུབ་བཅད་དེ འདུགས།
ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་དེས་གླིང་གི་མགོ་བཙོ་སྟེ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་བདུ་མ་དེ་ཁོ་
ལ་བག་མ་ལ་འོང་བས་ལ་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མས་གྲབས་བཅོས། དེ་ཟུག་
མོ་ངན་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཚོར་དེ། སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ལྕི་ཆུ་རབས་ལ་སོ་ སྡེ་སྲུང་སྡེ་
འདུགས་པ། ཞག་ཅིག་ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་རྡོ་ཞིག་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་ཡོང་ངད་ཚུག། ཨ་
གུ་ཆུའི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་དང། ཁོ་མགྱོགས་པ་སོང་སྟེ་གོང་ ནས་ཟུམ་སྟེ།
རྟ་ཐོག་ནས་ཕབ་སྟེ། ཆུའི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་གནན་ཏེ་མང་པོ་དུངས། དེ་ནས་ཐ་མ་ལ་
བིང་སྟེ། ངའི་ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ཡིན་ནོག། ང་ལ་མ་ཤེས་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་ངུ་རྫུན་
བཏངས། ཨ་གས་ཟེརས། ཁྱོད་ལ་མ་ཤེས་ན་ཁག་མེད་ཟེར་ཏེ་སོང།།
No: 3.
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཁོ་གྲོ་མ་ཐང་ལ་སྲུང་བ་སོང་སྟེ་འདུགས། ཞག་ཅིག་ཇོ་
ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་དང་གཡོག་མོ་ཚང་མ་དེ་རུ་གྲོ་མ་འབྲུ་བ་ལ་ཡོངས། དེ་རུ་ཁོང་ཚང་
མས་གྲོ་མ་བྲུས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་དང་གཡོག་མོ་ཀུན་ལ་ཉ་ངུན་རེ་ཐོབ་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་
ཕྲུག་ལ་གྲོ་མའི་ཏ་ཀྱི་ཞིག་བིང་སོང། ཁོས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་བསྟན་དེ་ ། སོ་བཏབས་པ།

ཡང་གསོབས་དེ་ཡོངས། གཡོག་མོ་ཞིག་གིས་ཟེརས། ཝ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག།
ང་ཞའི་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་སོ་ཞིག་བཏབ་བཅུག་ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས།
དུ་ཀི་ལ་སོ་རྗེས་ལུས་ན། དགུ་བཀལ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། གཡོག་མོས། ཁྱོད་
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་སོ་རྗེས་ལུས་པ་མི་དག། ང་ཞའི་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་མང་ང་མི་ལུས་
ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས། ཡ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལི། འདོན་འང་ཟེར་ཏེ་
བཏངས་པ། ཇོ ཇོས་སོ་བཏབས་པ། མ་གསོབས་པ་རྗེས་ལུས་སོང། དེ་ནས་
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་གིས་ཟེརས། ཨ་ཧོ་ ཧོ་ཇོ༌ ཇོ་ལེ། ང་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་
ཡིན་ནའང་ ད་གསོབས། ཉེ་རང་རིགས་བཟང་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཡིན་ནའང། ད་ཀི་ལ་
རྗེས་བིང། ཉེ་རང་བས་སང་ང་རྒྱལ་ལ་སོང་། ཨོ་ཧོ་ཧོ། ཁྱི་ཐུག་ཁྱི་ལ་
བཤད་ཡིན། མི་ཐུག་མི་ལ་བཤད་ཡིན་ཟེརས །
ཇ་ཇོ་མང་པོ་ཁྲེལ་དེ་ཟེརས་པ། ཝ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག ཁྱོ་རང་
གིས་དེ་ཟུག་མ་ཟེར་ཇུ་ཇུ། ཐོ་རས་ལ་ང་ཞའི་མི་སུན་ཡོང་ཆེན། ཨི་སུན་ལ་
ཁྱེ་རང་ཡང་ཐེ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་རྒྱལ་ཟེར་ཏེ་འདུགས།
བློ་རི་ཚུག་པོ་ཨི་སུན་གྱི་འབྲང་ས་ཤེས་ཏེ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཁང་པ་ལ་
སོང་སྟེ། སྒོ་ལྟག་པོ་ལ་ཡིབ་སྡེ་འདགས་པ་སང། ཇོ་ ཇོ་དང་གཡོག་མོ་ཚང་
མ་འཛོམ་སོང་། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མས་ཟེརས་པ། z་ཡ་དོ་པ་ཀུན། ང་དང་
ཚང་མ་འཛོམ་ན་སྒོ་སྲན་ཏེ་བཅུག། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ཡོང་ཡིན། ཁོས་རྩོག་
པོ་བཅོ་རུག་ཟེརས་པ། 
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཅེས་ཤེས་ཏེ
ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་ཇུ། ང་འདིར་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་ཡམ་ཚན་ཞིག་སོང་
སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། ཨོ་ཡོངས་ས། ང་ཞས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་བོས་པ། རྒྱལ་

ཟེར་རོད་པ།. མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས། ཨོ་མོལ་ལ་རག་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ་རྒྱུ། ཉེ་རང་
ཕ་མ་བཟང་པོའི་བུ་མོ་ཡིན་པའི་མ་ཤང་པོ་ཞིག་འདག་ཇོ་ཇོ་མཁྱེན་ཟེརས་པ།།
ངེ་ནས་ཁོང་ཡངས་པ་བཅོ་འིན་ཞིག་འདུགས། ཚ་བིག་འགོར་དེ་
ཇོ་ ཇོ་མགོ་ལ་བདུག་སྟེ་ཚང་མ་ཚོར་ལ་གཉིད་ལོགས་པ། མི་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་
ཕི་སྟ་ལ་བང ''ཡོངས། ཁྱིམ་མཚེས་པ་ཞིག་ལ་བོང་བུ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་བོང་
བུ་ལ་ཀུ་རུག་སྐྱ་ཅེས་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་བོང་བུ་ལ་རྡོག་ཚོང་ཞིག་བཏང་སྟེ། ཀུ་རུག་
འཕང་བཅུག་སྟེ་བོང་ཀ་རུག་གི་མགོ་བཅད་དེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། ཁོ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཡོད་པའི་ནང་
ལ་སོང་སྟེ་ཚང་མའི་སང་མཇུག་ལ་ཡོད་མཁན་ནི་ བུ་མོ་ཞིག་གི་མལ་ཅོ་ནང་བོར་
དེ་ཕི་བྷ་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ནང་གི་དཀར་ཁང་དང་སྒོ་བི་གང་ཚང་མ་མི་མཐོང་ཅེས་
བཅོ་བཀག་སྟེ་བོརས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་དང་བུ་མོ་ཚང་མས་ད་རུང་ནམ་མ་ལངས་བསམ་
སྟེ་འདགས། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་ཉི་མ་ཤར་སོང། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་
སྒོ་དཀར་ཁང་བི་གང་ཚང་མ་དུས་གཅིག་ལ་ཕྱེས་བཏང་སྟེ། ཁོ་ནང་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་
བློརས་པ། ལྔ་བསམ་པ་མེད་མཁན་ནི་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཚང་མ། ད་རུང་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་
ཡོད་ད། ཉི་མ་ཕྱེད་ཟམ་སོང། ཉེ་ཞ་ལ་ལས་མེད་མཁན་རེ་ཡིན་ན། ང་ལུང་
མཁན་ཡིན་ནའང། གྲོང་ཚང་མ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཕེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་ཟ་ཅེས་ཟ་ཚར་ཟེརས་པ།
ཁོང་ཁྲེལ་ཁྲེལ་རིག་སོང་སྟེ། མཇུག་ནས་ཕར་ལ་ལངས་པ། མཇུག་གི་བུ་
མོ འི་མལ་ཙེ་ནང་ན་བོང་བུ་ཀུ་རུག་གི་མགོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོ་ཁྲེལ་དེ་ལྟག་གི་
བུ་མོའི་མལ་པོ་ནང་དུ་བཏངས། དེ་བུ་མོས་ཡང་ལྷག་གི་བུ་མོ འི་ནང་དུ་བཏུངས།
དེ་ཟུག་བཅོ་འིན་ཞིག་ཇོ་ཇོ་ ཚུག་པ་བསླེབ་པས། བུ་མོ་ཞིག་གིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འི་
བཡོག་གོར་གྱི་ནང་ལ་བོར་སོང། ཁོང་ཚང་མ་ལངས་ཚར་ཚར་ཚུག་པ་མི་ངན་

༡༡
ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་བལྟ་སྟེ་འདུགས། ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་ལངས་ཙ་ན། གཡོག་གོར་
རི་ནང་ནས་ཀུ་རུག་གི་མགོ་བིང་སོང༌། 
དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་གྱི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཀུ་
བཏང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཨོ་ཧོ་ཧོ། འདི་རིང་ཇོ་ 
ཇོ་འབྲུག་མ་ལ་བོང་བུའི་མགོ་ཞིག་
སྐྱེས་ཏོག་ཟེརས། མི དང་ཐུག་ན་མི་ལ་བཤད་ཡིན། ཁྱི་དང་ག་ན་ཁྱི་ལ་
བཤད་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ།།
ཇོ་ཇོ་ཁྲེལ་ལིན་ཞིག་ཟེརས་པ། ལྔ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་ཇུ་ཇུ། དེ་ཟུག་
མ་ཟེར། ཞག་བཟང་པོ 
འི་ཞག་ལ་ངའི་གྲོགས་ཆང་ཞུ་ཆེན། དེ་ཞག་ལ་ཁྱོ་རང་
ལ་འང་ཞུ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། 
དེ་ཟུག་གྲོགས་མང་ཞུ་ཅེས་བཅོ་ལྕེ་འདགས
། མོ་ངན་ནི་
སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཀུ་རུག་གི་རྣ་མཆོག་གཅིག་པོ་བཅད་དེ་ཁར 
ཏ འདྲུགས། དེ་ནས་
ཞག་བཟང་པོ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ན། 
ཡུལ་གྱི་མི་ཞིག་གིས་ཚང་མ་ལ་སྐད་བཏངས
། འདི་
རིང་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མའི་གྲོགས་ཚང་ཞུ་རུབ།། གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ ་ མ་ཁྲོམ་ལ་
ཡོང་ཟེརས་པས། མི་ཚང་མ་འདུས། 
ཨ་གུ་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་གསེར་ཁྲི་བཏང་སྟེ་དེའི་
ཁ་འདུགས། 
གཞན་མ་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་གཡུ་ཁྲི་དང་དུང་ཁྲི་ཁ་འདུགས
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ལུང་ མཁན་ཚང་མའི་ 
མགོ་ལ་ཤག་གི་ཁྲི་རྒྱབ་སྟེ་འདགས།
དེ་ནས་ཇོ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་ མས་ནང་ན་སྦྲུལ་ 
མགོ་མ་ཆབས་རྐུན་ལ་ཆང་ བསྐངས་ཏེ།
མཐོ་དག་མ་ཀ་ལྕོར་རོན་ཏེ། 
ཁར་ཏེ་དར་དཀར་ཞིག་རིང་དུ། དར་དམར་ཞིག་
ཐུང་དུ་གོན་ཏེ་ཁྲོམ་ལ་ཡོངས། 
དེ་ནས་ཨ་གུ་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གི་མདུན་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་གླུ་
འདི་ལྟར།།
འདི་རིང་གི་ཞག་བཟངས་ལ་ནོ་མོ་ོང་རི་གྲོགས་ཆང་ཞུ་ཡིན
འདི་རིང་གི་སྐར་བཟངས་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་མོ 
འི་གྲོགས་མང་ཞུས།

སྦྲུལ་མགོ་ཆབ་ཀུན་ལ་མགོ་དགུ་ཀ་ལྕོར་རོན་ཡོད།
སྦྲུལ་མགོ་ཆབ་རྐྱེན་ནང་ཡང་དཀར་ནས་ཀྱི་གསུམ་ཆང།
ཡང་དཀར་ནས་ཀྱི་གསུམ་ཆང་དེ་མི་ཆེན་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཞུས།
ཕྱག་ནི་ཕྱག་སོར་བཅུ་པ་དང་མ་ལེན་པ།
ལ་ནི་པདྨའི་མེ་ཏོག་དང་ཐུག་མ་བཅུག་པ།
ལྕེ་མོ་དར་གྱི་མདུད་པ་དང་མ་མྱོང་བ།
ཨོལ་རྫོང་གསེར་གྱི་བུང་པ་དང་མ་རྨིད་པ།
སེམས་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་སེམས་དང་ལེན་ཏེ་ས་ལ་ཕོབ།
ཆོང་གང་དེ་དོན་དེ་ཇ་གང་དེ་མདུན་ལ་ཕོབ་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་མ་གུ་ཁའི་ཐུང་ལ་ཆང་དེ་ཞུས་པ། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་ཆབ་
རྒྱན་དེ་ལག་ལ་ལེན་དེན། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་མཐོང་སྟེ། ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟེ་ཆབ་
རྐུན་དེ་ལག་ནས་འབུད་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཀ་ལྕོར་ཚང་མ་ཞིག་སོང་བས། ཇོ་ཇོ་
འབྲུ་གུ་མ་མགྱོགས་པ་ཁང་བ་རུ་སོང་སྟེ་ཡང་ཀ་ལྕོར་རོན་དེ་ཚང་བསྐུང་སྟེ་ཁྲའི་
ཐུང་ལ་མ་ཞུས། གཡུ་ཁྲི་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་རྒོད་པོ འི་དཔལ་ལེ་ལ་ཞུས་པ། རྒོད་
པོ འི་དཔལ་ལ་དང་ཡང་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་ཞུས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ། ཉེ་
རང་གི་གྲོགས་ཆང་མཐུང་མཁན་ནི་མི་མེད་འགྲོ། ང་ཞས་མཐུང་མི་ཐུབ་ཟེར་ཏེ།
སུས་ཀྱང་མ་མཐུངས་པས། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་མ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གི་མདུན་ལ་
བསླེབ་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་མ་མཐོང་རྫུན་རྒྱབ་སྟེ་སོང་བ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་
ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ། འདིར་གཟིགས་འང་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཀུ་རུག་གི་ན་མཆོག་དེ་བསྟནས་པ།
ཇི་ 
ཇོ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཁོ་ལ་གྲོགས་ཚང་ཞུ་བ་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཀླུ་འདི་ལྟར

ཤག་གི་ཤག་ཁྲིའི་སྟེང་ན་པན་ཆུང་སྲོང་པོ་ཀུན་འདུག་ལོ།
བེར་ཀའི་བེར་ཁྲི་སྟེང་དུ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ཀུན་འདུག་ལོ།
ལག་པ་སེ་ཡག་ཅན་དང་མ་ལེན་པ་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཁ་དེ་ཆག་ར་དང་མ་ཐུག་པ་མཐུང་ལོ།
ལྕེ་སག་གདར་དང་མ་མྱང་བ་མཐུང་ལོ།
ཨོལ་ལྡོང་རིང་མོ་ནས་ཁ་རྨིད་པ་མཐང་ལོ།
དུག་སེམས་དེ་དང་ལེན་དེས་ལ་ཕོབ་ལོ།
ཆང་གང་མཐུང་སྟེ་ཇ་གང་མདུན་ལ་ཕོབ་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་སྦྲུལ་མགོ་མ་ཆབ་རྐུན་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གི་ལག་ལ་
བཏངས། མོ་ངན་ནི་སློང་ཕྲག་གིས་གསོལ་མཆོད་ཅིག་འདི་ལྟར་།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་བའི་ལྷ་དག་ལ་མཆོད།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་སྦྱང་རོགས་མཛོད།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་དགུ་ལ་མཆོད།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་སྤུང་རོགས་མཛོད།
སྟེང་ལྷའི་དབང་བོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ལ་མཆོད།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་སྒྲུང་རོགས་མཛོད།
བར་གྱི་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབ་བདུན་ལ་མཆོད།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་སྤུང་རོགས་མཛོད།
འོག་གི་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྕོགས་པོ་ལ་མཆོད།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་སྒྲུང་རོགས་མཛོད།

96
ཕས་ལྷ་ཀེར་ང་སྙན་པོ་ལ་མཆོད །
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་སྤྱང་རོགས་མཛོད།
མས་ལྷ་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་ལ་མཆོད།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་སྦྱང་རོགས་མཛོད །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་གསོལ་མཆོད་བཏངས། སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ་སྟེ། ཆང་
གང་དོན་ཏེ་ཇ་གང་མདུན་ལ་ཕོབ་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁྱི་སོ་ཅན་བེར་ཀ་ནང་གཅིག་བཏང་སྟེ་
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་ཕངས། ཆང་གང་མཐུང་སྟེ་ཇ་གང་པོ་མདན་ལ་ཕབས། དེ་ནས་
ལྕང་མཁན་ཚང་མས་ཀུ་ཙོ་བཏངས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་དེ་ང་ཞའི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་
ཐོབ་སོང་ཟེར་དེ་ཧབ་རྒོད་བཏངས།།
No. 4
ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་གཉིསཀས་གསེར་ཁྲི་རྒྱབ་སྟེ། དར་
དཀར་གྱི་ཡོལ་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། མི་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཐོབ་ཟེར་
པ་སང། གསེར་ཁྲི་འཐེན་དེ་ཡོལ་བ་ཡང་འཐེན་ཏེ། ཆ་ལི་ནག་པོ འི་ཡོལ་ག
ཞིག་བཏངས། སྟན་ཆད་པོ་ཞིག་ཕྱིར་ལོག་ལ་བཏིང་སྟེ་བོརས། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་
གྱི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ལུང་མཁན་ཚང་མས་ཤག་ གི་ཁ་པལ་ཀྱི་ལ་ཁར་ཏེ་ ཡབ་བརྟན་པ་
དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ འི་ཁང་པར་རས། དེ་ནང་ལ་བསླེབ་པ། སྟན་ཕིར་ལོག་ལ་
ཡོད་པ་སང། ཁོ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་ལ་འདུགས། དེ་ནས་ཡབ་བརྟན་པ་དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་
མོས་ཟེརས། ཁྱོད་ལུང་མཁན་ད་ཡིན་ནོག། སྲོང་པོ་ད་ཁྱོད་ཡིན་ནོག! ཕྱིར་
ལོག་ལ་འདུག་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས། སྟན་ཁ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་ལ།
འགྲོན་ཁ་ཕིར་ལོག་ལ་འདག་དགོས་ཟེརས་པའི། དེ་ནས་སོ་བའི་ཕེའི་ཟན་ཞིག་

94
གཡོ་སྟེ་ཁོ འི་མདུན་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ། ཨ་བས་མིག་ལོག་བལྟས། ཨ་མས་ས་
མིག་བལྟས། ཇོ ཇོས་ཐབ་བི་ནང་ན་ས་བྲུས། ཁྱིམ་ཤང་དེ་ལ་ཁྱི་ཕྲུག་གཅིག་
ཡོད་ཚུག། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཁྱི་ཕྲུག་དེ་ལ་ཟེརས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།།
ཁྱིམ་ཤང་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ཁྱི་ཕྲུག་ཁྱོད་ཉོན་དང༌།
ཁྱིམ་མཇུག་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ཁྱི་ཆུང་དེས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
སྟན་ལ་བལྟ་ན་ཡིར་ལོག་ལ་འདུག།
མདུན་ལ་བལྟ་ན་སོ་བ་ཟན་ཞིག་འདག།
གྲལ་མགོ་ལ་བལྟ་ན་ཨ་བས་མིག་ལོག་ལྟ་རུག།
འབང་ལ་བལྟ་ན་ཨ་མས་ས་མིག་ལྟ་རུག།
དཀྱིལ་ལ་བལྟ་ན་བུ་མོས་ཐབ་བྲུ་རུག།
ཁྱེད་ཁྱི་གུ་ལང་སྟེ་རྩིས་ཤིག་ཁྱོང་དང།
ཤར་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་གསུམ་རྒྱོབ་དང།
ནུབ་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་གསུམ་རྒྱོབ་དང།
ལྷོ་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་གསུམ་རྒྱོབ་དང།
བྱང་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་གསུམ་རྒྱབ་དང།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཁྱི་ཕྲུག་དེ་སྨྱོན་པ་མཆོགས་སོང་སྟེ། ཤར་
ལྷོ་ནབ་བྱུང་ཚང་མ་ལ་གོམ་པ་གསུམ་གསུམ་བརྒྱབས་པ། ཁྱི་ཕྲུག་དེས་ཁྱི་
སྐྱུག་དང་ཁྱི་སྦྱིན་དང་ནང་ཚང་མ་བསྐངས་བཏངས། དེ་བྱུག་བཅོས་པ་སང།
མི་ཚང་མ་དང་ལྕང་མཁན་ཚང་མ་ནང་ནས་ཕྱི་སྟ་རུ་ཤོར་ཏེ་སོང།
དེ་ནས་མཚན་སོང་སྟེ་ཨ་བྲ་དང་ཨ་མས་བུ་མོ་ལ་ཟེར ། ལྷ་བུ་མོ།

97
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཕུག་རགས་ལ་སྙལ་བ་ཁྱེར་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོས་ཤང་ཀོག་
ཅིག་ཁུར་ཏེ། ཕུག་རགས་ལ་ཁྱེར་དུ་བོར་ཏེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོངས། ཡབས་བརྟན་པ་
དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོའི་སྒོ་ཁྱི་ལ་སྟག་གཟིག་དང་གཅན་ཟན་མང་པོ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་མཚན་ཕྱེད་ཟམ་ལ་ལང་སྟེ། ཤང་ལག་དེ་ཚང་མ་བཅད་དེ་
རུས་པ་ཁ་ཅིག་དང་མཉམ་བོསྒོ་ལ་ཕང་སྟེ་ན། མི་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཤོར་ཏེ་དྲི་
མོ་དགུ་ཆོད་ཀྱི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་དུ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཨ་མའི་རྩ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་འདུགས
དེ་ ནས་གནམ་ ལང་ སྟེ་ལུང་མཁན་ཚང་མ་ཡོང་སྟེ་སྒོ་ནས་ ཟེརས།
ལྕཡབ་བརྟན་པ་དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་མོ། ང་ཞའི་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་
ལ་སྲབ་ཅིག་ལྟོས་ཟེར་འང་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་དེ་ཕུག་རགས་ལ་ལྟ་མ་སོང་བ་
མེད་ཚུག། ཇོ ཇོ་མགྱོགས་པ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཨ་བ་དང་ཨ་མ་ལ། བོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་
མི་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོང་ཚང་གིས་ཕྱི་ནང་ཚང་མ་ལ་བལྟས་པ་མེད་ཚུག། སྒོ་ལ་
བལྟས་པ། ཤང་ལབ་དེ་བཅད་དེ་ཕང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་རུ་རུས་པ་རེ་ཡང་
ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་ཚང་ཀས། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་འདི་གཅན་ཟན་ཀུན་
ས་ཟོས་མཁན་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེར་དེ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང
། དེ་ནས་ལང་མཁན་ཚང་མས་
ཡང་ཟེརས། ང་ཞའི་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཁྱོ་ཞེས་བསད་མཁན་དང་དོག་ཡིན།
ཚོ་ཇན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གི་མི་ཤ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ལུང་མཁན་ཀུན་ལ་ཡེ་དང་མར་མང་
བོབཏང་སྟེ་བོརས། ཇོ་ཇོ་དེ་གསེར་ད་བག་གང་ང་བ་གཡུའི་ཚིག་བུ་གལ་ཏེ།
ཨ་བུ་དགའ་ནི་རྩ་མོ་བཏབ་པ་སོང་བས། ཨ་གུའི་སྒོ་ན་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།།
ཨ་ག་རང་མཁྱེན་ལོ་དགའ་ནི་རང་མཁྱེན་ལོ།
གསེར་རི་ཏ་བག་གང་པོ འིཁ་གཡུའི་ཚིག་བུ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།

s
ང་ལ་གླིང་གི་པན་ཆུང་དེ་སྟོར་དེ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
བོ་ངན་གྱི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་སྟོར་ཏེ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
མོ་དཔེ་བཏིང་སྟེ་མོ་ཞིག་ཏོབ་ལོ།
རྩིས་དཔེ་བཏིང་སྟེ་རྩིས་ཤིག་སྐོར་ལོ།
ཤི་སྟེ་འདུག་གསོན་ཏེ་འདུག་གཟིགས་ལོ།
ཤོར་ཏེ་སོང་ང་ཡིབ་སྡེ་འདུག་གཟིགས་ལོ།
ང་ལ་པན་ཆུང་སྲོང་པོ འི་མི་ཤ་རིག་ཕོག་འདུག།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གི་སྒོ་ཁག་རིག་ཕོག་འདུག།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་གུ་དགའ་ནི་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་སྲོ་ཡོངས། སྔོན་ལ་
བན་ཆུང་ལ་ཡ་ཤ་མ་བཅོས་པའི་ཕྱི་ལ། ཨ་གས་ལན་དུ །
ཡབས་བརྟན་པའི་བུ་མོ་ཁ་དམར་མོ་ཉོན་དང་།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོའི་བུ་མོ་ལྕེ་དམར་མོ་ཉོན་དང།
ཞིམ་པོ་བཟོས་པའི་མོལ་སོགས་མོ་ཉོན་ལོ།
ལགས་མོ་གནས་པའི་སྲང་ཁོར་མོ་ཉོན་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་ལྟས་ངན་ནི་བུ་མོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
པན་ཇུང་དེ་ནི་ཤི་མཁན་རིག་ཡིན་ནོག།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཤི་སྟེ་ཡོད་ལོ།
ཁོའི་མི་ཤ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཕོག་ཡིན་ལ།
ཁོ འི་སྒོ་འདྲ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཕོག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ང་ལ་མོ་དང་རྩིས་རིག་མི་ཤེས་ལོ

99
དེ་ཟུག་སྲོ་བསྟན་དེ་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཇོ༌ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་དུ་འིན་ཞིག་
ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོངས། ཁང་པ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཨ་བྲ་དང་ཨ་མ་ལ། ཨ་གུས་ང་ལ་སྲོ་
བཙོ་སྡེ་ཁ་མང་པོ་སྐྱེས་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་ཚང་ཀ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟེ། ཡང་
ཆ་རྒྱལ་ཟེར་དེ ། གསེར་རི་ཏ་བྲག་ཅིག་གི་ཁ་མུ་ཏིག་བསྐངས་དེ་བཀལ་ཏེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་
སོང་སྟེ། ཨ་གའི་སྒོ་ན་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
བུ་མོ་ངའི་ཨ་གུས་འང་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཨ་གུ་དགའ་ནིས་འང་བུ་མོ་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
གསེར་རི་ཏ་བག་གང་ལ་མུ་ཏིག་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ །
ཉེ་རང་གིས་མོ་དཔེ་བཏིང་སེ་མོ་ཞིག་ཧོབ་ལོ།
རྩིས་དཔེ་བཏིང་སེ་རྩིས་ཤིག་སྐོར་ལོ།
ཁོ་ཤི་སྟེ་འདུག་གསོན་ཏེ་འདུག་གཟིགས་ལོ།
ཁོ་གསོན་ཏེ་ལ་ཡོད་ན་ང་བཙལ་བ་རིག་ཆེན་ལོ །
ཁོ་ཤི་སྟེ་རིག་ཡོད་ན་མི་ཤ་ཐག་ཆོད་རིག་ཕོག་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་མང་པོ་ངུས་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོངུ་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ་
སྡིག་པ་བསམ་སྟེ། ཨ་གས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཡབས་ཐོན་པའི་བུ་མོ་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང་།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ འི་བུ་མོ་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང་།
སྔོན་ལ་ར་གན་གྱི་རི་ལ་འཛགས་དགོས་ཡོང་ཡིན།
དྲུང་ན་གསེར་གྱི་རི་ལ་བསླེབ་ནས་ཡོང་ཡིན།
སྔོན་ལ་རོ་ཉའི་རི་ལ་འཛགས་དགོས་ཡོང་ཡིན།

iji
དྲུང་ན་དངུལ་གྱི་རི་ལ་བསླེབ་ཅས་རིག་ཡོང་ཡིན།
སྔོན་ལ་བྲུ་ཟན་དང་སྒོག་ཆུ་ཟ་དགོས་བྱུང་ཡིན།
དིང་ན་ཞིམ་ཟག་དང་དངར་ཆུ་ཐོབ་ཅས་ཡོང་ཡིན།
གླིང་གི་པན་ཇུང་མ་སྟོར་བ་ཡོད་ལོ།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་མ་ཤི་བ་ཡོད་ལོ།
དྲི་མོ་དག་ཆོད་ཀྱི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་དུ་ཡོད་ལོ །
ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཉེ་རང་དེ་རུ་ལྟ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
དེ་ལུང་པའི་ནང་དུ་སྒང་གཅིག་རང་ཡོད་ལོ །
དེ་སྒང་པོའི་ཁ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཉེ་རང་སོང་ལོ།
ཤི་ལང་གི་ཕག་ར་ཞིག་རང་ཅོས་ལོ །
ཕག་ར་དེའི་ནང་ན་ཡིབ་སྟེ་རིག་ལྟོས་ལོ།
སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ཁོ་དེ་ནས་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཐོབ་ཡིན།
དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་མང་པོ་འཐད་དོན་ཞིག་དང་ཁང་པ་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་
ཡོང་སྟེ། ཨ་བ་དང་ཨ་མ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཧན་དེ་ཚང་མ་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ཇོ་
རང་དང་གཡོག་མོ་ཞིག་ཁྲིད་དེ། དྲི་མོ་དག་ཆོད་མའི་ནང་དུ་སོང། དེ་རུ་སྒང་
ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། །ཁོང་དེ་སྒང་མགོ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཤི་ལང་གི་ཕག་ར་ཞིག་བཙོ་སྟེ།
དེའི་ནང་ལ་ཡིབ་སྟེ་འདུགས། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེས་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་
ལུགས་ལ། སྟངས་དང་གྲོས་བསླབ་བིན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས། རྟ་ཞིག་ལ་ཞོན་
དེ་དཾ་འུ་ཚགས་མ་གང་རྟའི་ཁ་ནས་ཕང་གིན་ཞིབག་བང་བཏང་མེད་ཚུག། ཐུར་ལ་
ཡོང་ཙ་ན། དྲི་འུ་ཚགས་མ་གང་པོ་བསྡུ་འིན་ཞིག་མདའ་ལ་སྐར་ཚར་རད་ཚུག།

iol
ཡང་ཉང་སྐར་བྲེ་གང་ཁུར་ཏེ་གྱེན་ལ་ཆ་ཟ་ན་གཡོག་གིན་སོང། ཐུར་ལ་ཆ་ཟ་ན།
བསྡུ་འིན་ཡོང་སྟེ་བྲེ་བསྐང་ངད་ཚུག། དཔུང་པ་གཡས་པའི་ཁ་ཉི་མ་ཤར་བ་
འདྲ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དཔུང་པ་གཡོམ་མའི་ཁ་ཟླ་བ་ཤར་བ་འདྲ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཇོ་ ཇོ་
དང་གཡོག་མོ་གཉིས་ཀ་དེ་ཟུག་མཐོང་སྟེ་ཧབ་རྒོད་བཏངས་པ། དེ་ནས་ར་རུ་
དྲག་པོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཁ་ཆར་རླུང་མང་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོང་སྟེ། མི་མཐོང་ཅེས་སོང།
དེའི་དྲུང་ན་ཆར་པ་ཆད་དེ་ན། སྔོན་མའི་མཆོགས་སེ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་བཅོ་སྡེ་
གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ལྔ་ཡབས་ཐོན་པའི་བུ་མོ་ཁ་དམར་མོ། ཁ་དམར་མོ།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ འི་བུ་མོ་ལྕེ་དམར་མོ ། ལྕེ་དམར་མོ། །
ཞིམ་པོ་ཟོས་པའི་ཚིལ་སོགས་མོ། ཚིལ་སོགས་མོ།
ལགས་མ་གོནས་པའི་སྲང་ཁོར་མོ ། སྲང་བོད་མོ།
ཁྱོད་ངའི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་དུ་ཅི་ལ་ཡོངས། ཅི་ལ་ཡོངས།
ངས་གཡའ་དཀར་ནས་ཁྱོངས་པའི་རྫབ་དཀར་ཁྱོང། རྫབ་དཀར་ཁྱོང།
ངས་གཡའ་ནག་ནས་ཁྱོངས་པའི་རྫོབ་ནག་ཁྱོང། རྫོབ་ནག་ཁྱོང་།
པའི་ཟ་ཅེས་སི་འདོད་པོ་ཡང་དེ་བ་ཡིན། དེ་བོ་ཡིན།
ངའི་མཐང་ཅེས་སི་འདོད་པ་ཡང་དེ་བོ་ཡིན། དེ་བོ་ཡིན།
ངའི་ཞེན་རྟ་ཟེར་ནའང་དེ་བོ་ཡིན། དེ་བོ་ཡིན།
པའི་ནང་ནོར་ཟེར་ནའང་དེ་བོ་ཡིན། ད་བོ་ཡིན།
ངའི་ཕི་ནོར་ཟེར་ནའང་དེ་བོ་ཡིན། དེ་བོ་ཡིན།

102
ངའི་རྫོབ་ར་དཀར་པོ་ག་ནས་ཁྱོང་ནའང་ཁྱོང། ཁྱོང་ནའང་ཁྱོང་
ངའི་རྫོབ་ར་ནག་པོ་ག་ནས་ཁྱོང་ནའང་ཁྱོང། ཁྱོང་ནའང་ཁྱོང།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་དང་གཡོག་མོ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་སྙད་མང་པོ་ཞིག་
བཏངས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ཇོས་ཁོའི་རྐང་པ་ལ་འཐམ་སྟེ་ཇུ་མང་པོ་བཅོ་སྡེ་ཟེརས།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་ཇུ་ཇུ་གྲུལ། ང་ལ་ཁོ་རང་གི་ལུང་མཁན་ཀུན་ནིས། མོ་ངན་
ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གི་མི་ཤ་ཁྱོང་ཟེར་དེ་སྙད་བཏང་འདུག། མི་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་
ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ང་ཆེན། ད་ལྟ་ང་ཞའི་ཁང་པ་ལ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་གྲུལ་ཟླ་ཅེས་རེ
ཟོས་ཏེ། དེ་ནས་ཆ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཚང་ཀ་ཁང་པ་ལ་སོང།
ཁང་པ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས། ཨལ་ཙེ་ཞིག་ཐབ་བི་
ཁ་བཀལ་ཏེ་མེ་ཞིག་ཕ་སྟེ་ཤ་ཞིག་བཅོས། ཤ་དེ་སྦྱིན་གྱི་ཡིན་ན་ཡང། ཇོ་ ཇོས་
རྫོབ་ར་ཁ་ཅིག་བཅོ་བ་ལ་མཐོང་སོང། ཤ་དེ་བཙོས་ས་དང། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་
ཕྲག་གིས་རྫབ་ར་ཞིག་ཟུམ་སྟེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་བསད་དེ་ཇོ་ཇོ འི་ལོག་པའི་ཡོག་ལ་ཤེས་
ཁ་བཅུག་པ་བཏང་སྟེ་བོརས། དེ་ནས་ཤ་འཚོ་སྟེ་པོག་སྟེ་ན། ཨལ་ཅོ་ནང་ནས་
ཕིངས། ཤ་གཅིག་ཅིག་མ་ཚང་བས། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཟེརས།
ཤུ་མ་ཚང། སུས་ཟོས་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་མས་ངས་མ་ཟོས་ཟེརས། ཇོ་ ཇོའི་
གཡོག་མོ་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། མ་ཟོས་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཁོ་རང་ལ་འདྲིས་པ།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཝ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག། དག་ས་ཚུག་པ་
ངས་རྐུ་མི་ཤེས། ཁྱོད་དིས་ཅི་ཟེར་དེ་ཡིན་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་ཀག་ལངས་པ་སོང།
རྫོབ་ར་དེ་ཅབ་བུད་དེ་ཡོངས་པ་སང། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས། ཀ་ཅོ་བཏང་
སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོད་ཕ་མ་བཟང་པོ འི་བུ་མོ། རྐུན་མ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག།

108
ངས་མི་ཐག་མི་ལ་ཤད་ཡིན།
ཁྱི་ཐུག་ཁྱི་ལ་ཤད་ཡིན།
ཟིར་ཏེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཁྲེལ་བཙུགས།
No. 5,
དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིསཟེརས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་རང་པ། སྔོན་ལ་
གྲལ་ཤིག། 
ངས་ཨ་མ་ལ་ཤིང་རེ་རུ་རེ་ཁྱོང་སྡེ་རྟིང་ན་ཡོང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ
ཇོ༌ ཇོ་དང་གཡོག་མོ་གཉིས་ཀ་སྔོན་ལ་འགྲལ་བཞུགས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་པ་རྫ་ལམ་གྱིས་
ཆ་ཆ་། ཁོ་བྱེ་མའི་ལམ་གྱིས་སོང་སྟེ། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཁོ་སྔོན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང།
དེ་ལུང་མཁན་ཚང་མ་སོང་སྟེ་མེད་ཚུག། ཡང་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཨ་
ཟུག་ཧན་ཞིག་བཏངས། བྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི་བསད་དེ། གྲོང་སྤགས་དེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་གླིང་
མཁར་ལ་བཏིང་སྟེ། 
མཁར་ཡུལ་ཚང་མ་ཁྱེད་དེ་འདོམ་དག་ལྷག་མ་ལུས་བཅུག་
མཁན་ལ་ཇོ་ 
ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་བག་མ་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་སྐད་བཏངས
། དེ་ནས་
དའ་བོ་ ཚང་མ་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་ཚར། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལུས་འདག་པ། ཡབ་
བརྟན་པ་དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཁོ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོ་རང་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་
ཡང་བྲོང་བསད་པར་ཆ་དགོས། རྒྱགས་འཁར་ཅེས་ལ་སྣོད་ཅིག་ཏོང་ཟེརས་པ།
ཁོས་ཨ་ཕུས་སེའི་རྐྱལ་ལུ་ཞིག་བཏངས། 
དེ་ཀྲ་ཕུས་སེའི་རྒྱལ་ལུ་ཡི་ནང་དུ་ཕེ་
ལ་བརྒྱ་བཏང་ནའང། མ་གང་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོའི་
འདོན་ཕྲོ་ན་ཞིག་སྩལ་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནང་ནས་ཉུང་ངུན་ཞིག་བཏངས་པ་གང་སོང།
ཡང་མར་ཁར་སྣོད་ཅིག་ཁྱོང་ཟེརས་བ། སྟར་གའི་ཁོམ་བུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་སོང།
དེའི་ནང་དུ་མར་བ་ཏི་བརྒྱ་བཏངས་པ་མ་གང། ཡང་ཁོས་ཟེརས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འི་

104
འདོན་ཕྲོ་ན་ཞིག་སྩལ་ཨ་མ་ལེ་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཉང་ངུན་ཞིག་བཏངས་པ།
སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་གང་སོང།།
དེ་ནས་དྲང་གེ་ དང་དྲོང་གེ་གཉིས་ཀ་ཁོ་ལ་ཡ་དོ་ལ་ བཏངས་ པས།
དེ་ཡུལ་ཞིག་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང། དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་འཛོམ་སྟེ་འདུགས། མོ་ངན་ནི་
སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་སོ་སོ་འདུགས། དེ་ནས་དཔའ་བོ་ ཚང་མས་ཟེརས། ཐོ་རེ་ན།
ཡུལ་ཡོད་ད་མེད། ཆུ་དང་ཤིང་ཡོད་དུ་མེད། ང་དང་སུ་ལ་ཡང་རྒྱས་མེད།
མོ་ངན་གྱི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་རྒྱས་ཡོད་འགྲོ ། ཁོས་ཅི་ཟེར་འདུག་ལྟ་ལ་ཆ་རྒྱལ་ཟེར་ཏེ།
ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་བཏངས། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་ལ་ཕག་ཉན་པ་ཡོང་རེས་ཤེས་ཏེ།
དྲང་གེ་དང་དྲོང་གེ་གཉིས་ལ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་དྲང་གེ་དང་སྲོང་གེ། ཐོ་རེ་ང་དང་
ལ་ཤིང་མི་ཐོག་ཤིང་འཁར་ན་རྒྱལ་ཆུ་མང་པོ་ཡོད་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་་
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་རེས་ཚོར་དེ་ཡིད་ཆེས་ཏེ། དཔའ་བོ་ ཚང་མ་ལ་ཤིང་གལ་ཏེ་ཁྱེརས།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཤིང་མ་འཁར་ར་། ཆུ་ཆང་རྐྱལ་གསུམ་བཀལ་ཏེ་
ཁྱེརས། ཁོང་ཚང་མ་དེ་རུ་དགོངས་ལ་འཛོམ་ཙ་ན། ཤིང་མང་པོ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
ཆུ་མན་ན་མེད་ཚུག། དེའི་ཕི་ལ་དཔའ་བོ་ཀུན་ལ་ཆུ་མེད་དགགས་པོ་སོང་སྟེ།
བོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཇུ་ཟེརས་པ། །ཁོས་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཆུ་ཉུང་ངུན་རེ་བཏངས།།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཕི་དྲོ་ལ་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་ཀས་ཟེརས། མདང་ཨ་ག་དཔལ་
ལེ་ལ་ཧ་མ་གོ་བ་ཡིན་ནོ། ། འདི་རིང་ཨང་གར་ལངས་པ་ཉན་པ་ལ་སོང།
t
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཤིང་འཁར་འདག་ག། ཆུ་འཁུར་འདག་ཉན་པ་སོང་
ཟེར་ཏེ་བཏངས། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཕག་ཉན་བཏང་བ་ཡོང་ཅེས་དེ་ཤེས་ཏེ།
ཡང་ཁོས་ཕྱིར་ལོག་ཟེརས། ལྔ་དྲང་གེ་དང་དྲོང་གེ། གོ་རས་ལ་ཤིང་མ་མང་

10E
པོ་ཡོད། ཆུ་དཀོན་མོ་ཡོད། ཆུ་ཁར་ཤིག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨང་གར་ལུངས་པས་
དེ་ཟུག་ཡིད་རེས་ཏེ། ལོག་སྡེ་སོང་སྟེ་དཔའ་བོ་ཀན་ལ་ཟེརས། ཐོ་རས་ལ་
ཤིང་ཡོད་ལོ། ཆུ་དཀོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ། ཆུ་ཁར་ཤིག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཆུ་མང་པོ་
འཁར་བཙུགས། མི་ངན་གྱི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་དྲང་གེ་དང་དྲོང་གེ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཤིང་
ཁར་རི་བཀལ་དེ་ལྡིང་ན་སོང་བས། ཡང་དེ་རུ་བསླེབ་ཙ་ན། ཆུ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
ཤིང་མེད་པ། དཔའ་བོ་ཀུན་ལ་མ་དཀགས་བོ་སོང་སྟེ། ཡང་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་
ཕྲག་གི་མདུན་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཇུ་ཟེརས་པ། ཡང་ཤིང་ཉུང་ངུན་རེ་བཏངས།།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་དཔའ་བོ་ཀན་གྱིས་ཟེརས། ཁྱོ་ཞུ་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཡང་དུ་མ་
གོ་བ་ཡིན་འགྲོ ། འདི་རིང་ཨ་ག་དགའ་ནི་རང་སོང་ཟེར་ཏེ་བཏངས་པ། ཆེ ངན་
ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཕག་ཉན་བཏུང་ཆེས་ཤེས་ཏེ། ཡང་ཟེརས། ལྤ་དྲང་གེ་དང་
དྲོང་གེ། གོརས་ལ་ཡུལ་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་དང་ཐུག་ཆེན་གོན་ཅེས་སོ་མ་ར་བོདོན་ཤིག །
ཁོང་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མས་གོ་ཤེན་གོན་ཡིན་འགྲོ ། ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་ག་དགའ་ནི་
ཡིད་ཆེས་དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ། དཔའ་བོ་ཀན་ལ་ཟེརས། ཐོ་རས་ལ་ཡུལ་ཞིག་
དང་ཐག་ཆེན་ལོ། གོན་ནས་སོ་མ་རེ་གོན་དེ་གཱལ་ཟེར་འདག། ང་དང་ཡང་
ཟབ་ན་རྒྱལ་ཟེར་ཏེ་གོ་ཤེན་རེ་གོན་ཏེ་སོང་བ། ལམ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཚེར་མའི་ཚོགས་
ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོང་གི་གོ་ཤེན་ཚང་མ་ཆོར་མང་གིས་བཅད་དེ་ཚར་ཏེ།
ལམ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཕང་གིན་སོང་བ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་གོ་ཤེན་བུད་མཁན་
ཚང་མ་སྔ་འིན་ཞིག་སོང་པ། གོ་ཤེན་གྱི་གོན་ཅེས་གཅིག་སོང༌། དེ་དཔའ་བོ་
ཚང་མའི་གོ་ཤེན་ཆོད་དེ། ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་ཟ་ན་མེད་མཁན་སོང། ཁོང་ལ་མི་
སུས་ཀྱང་ཡ་ཤ་མ་བཅོས་པའི། མ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེས་བུད་མཁན་ནི་གོ་ཤེན་

104
ལ་འཐུད་དེ་གོན་དེ་སོང་པ་སང། དེའི་ཡུལ་པ་ཚང་མས་ཕོག་ཀ་ལྕོར་ཁར་དེ་
བསུས་ཏེ་ཡོངས། དེ་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ལ་རང་རིན་མ་ཡོངས་པ་སང་། དེན་ན་
ཟ་ན་ལུང་པ་སོ་སོ་ཡི་ནང་དུ་འབྲོང་བཙལ་བ་སོང་། །
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག། དེ་ཡུལ་གྱི་མགོ་ལ་སྤང་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་རུ་
སོང་སྟེ། ཕུ་ཐུངས་གཅིག་གི་ནང་ད་མགོ་བཏངས། གཅིག་གི་ནང་དུ་རྐང་པ་
བཏང་སྟེ་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་འདུགས། དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མས་རིའི་ཤུ་བ་མང་པོ་བསད་
དེ་ཤ་མང་པོ་ཟའད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་དྲང་གེ་དང་དྲོང་གེ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཟེརས་པ།
ཝང་ཏང་གཉིས་ཀ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཡ་དོ་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཅང་མ་ཕན། དཔའ་
བོ་ཚོང་མ་དང་མཉམ་པོ་ཡོད་ཡིན་ན། ང་ཏང་ལ་ཡང་ཤ་ཐོབ་པིན། མི་ངན་ནི་
སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་འདུགས་པ་སང། ང་ཏང་ལ་ཅང་མ་ཐོབ་སོང་ཟེརས་པ་
དེ་ན་སྦྱོར་ཅེས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་གཉིད་དི་ནང་ལ་ཚོར་སོང། དེ་ནས་སྲོང་
ཕྲུག་འདུག་སའི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བྲག་ཅིག་གི་ཁ་རུ་སྐྱིན་ཅིག་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས།
དེ་ལ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་སོག་ལྷེ་ཞིག་བཏངས་པ། སྐྱོན་དེ་ཤི་
སྟེ་ཁོང་གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང་བས། དྲུང་གེ་དང་དྲོང་གེ་གཉིས་ལ་ཟེརས།
ལྔ་ཀཱན་ནིག} འདི་སྐྲུན་པོ་དེ་གངས་ཀྱི་ཁ་ཁྱེར་དེ་ཤས། གངས་ཀྱི་ཁ་ཁྲག་
ཙ་བིག་འང་གོས་མ་ཅུག། ཙ་བིག་གོས་ན། ཁོ་ཞུའི་སྐྱེ། ངའི་གི་ཡིན་ཟེརས།
དེ་ནས་དྲང་གེ་དང་དྲོང་གི་འཇིགས་སིན་ཞིག་ཁྱེར་ཏེ་གངས་ཀྱི་ཁ་བཤས། ཁྲག་
ཙ་པིག་གོས་ན། ཁོང་གིས་ལྕེ་དང་བལག་སྡེ་མེད་མཁན་བཅོས་སོང། ཤ་ཁྱོང་
སྡེ་ཟ་འིན་ཞིག་འདུགས་པ། ཡང་ཞག་གཅིག་སོང་སྟེ། དེ་བྲག་གི་ཁ་ཡང་
གསེར་རི་རུ་ཅོ་ཡོད་མཁན་ནི་སྐྱིན་ཞིག། དངུལ་གྱི་རུ་ཙོ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག།

107
དྭང་གི་རུ་ཅོ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག། མུ་ཏིག་གི་རུ་ཅོ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག། ཟངས་ཀྱི་
རུ་སོ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག། གཡུའི་རུཙོ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག། ཅུ་རུའི་རུ་ཙོ་ཡོད་
མཁད་ཞིག། དེ་ཟུག་བདུན་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་སྐྱིན་བདུན་གྱིས་མོ་ངན་ནི་
སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་འདི་ལྟར །
སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ན་བཏགས་པའི་དོན་གྲུབ་དཀར་པོ་གསན་དང་།
གླིང་ཡུལ་གཞུང་ན་བཏགས་པའི་མ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ཉོན་དང།
ཤ་ཚོ་ང་ཞེས་བཏགས་པའི་གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གསན་དང།
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཀུན་ཡོང་སྟེ་ང་ཞུའི་ཤ་རབས་བཅད་འདུག།
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་ཀ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ང་འི་ས་བོན་བཅད་འདུག།
དེའི་ཕི་ལ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ཐུགས་རྗེ་རིག་གཟིགས་ལོ།
དེའི་ཕི་ལ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་སྐྱོབས་རིག་མཛད་ལོ།
ཉེ་རང་གིས་སྲུང་བ་རིག་མ་མཛད་ན་ང་ཞ་མི་ལུས་ཐག་ཆོད་འདུག།
ཀེ་སར་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་ཞུས་པ་སང། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ལན་དུ་ཡང་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས་སོ།
ཁྱེད་ལྷ་སྐྱིན་ཚང་ཀས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
ཁྱེད་ཀླུ་སྐྱིན་ཚང་མས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ །
འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རིའི་འདུག་ས་ག་རུ་ཡོད་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཁམ་བ་ལ་ག་རུ་འདུག་ས་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་འདུག་ས་བསྟན་ན་ཁྱེད་ལ་རོགས་བཅོ་ཡིན།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི་མ་བསྟན་ན་ཁྱེད་ལ་སྲུང་ཆེས་ཤིག་མེད་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཁམ་བ་མ་བསྟན་ན་ཁྱེད་ཀུན་ལ་རོགས་མི་ཡོང།

108
དེ་ཟུག་གི་ལན་བཏིངས་པ་སང། སྐྱིན་ཚང་ཀ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྡེ་ཟེརས།
འབྲོང་དེ་བསྟན་ན། ང་ཏང་ལ་མནའ་ཡོད། མ་བསྟན་ན། ང་ཏང་ཚང་མ་ཤི་
ཅེས་སོང། ད་ཅི་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། སྐྱིན་གཅིག་གིས་ཟེརས། འབྲོང་ཆེན་
ཁོ་རང་བསྟན་ན། ང་ཏུང་ལ་མནའ་ཡོང་ཡིན། དེ་བས་འབྲོང་དེ་ཡོད་པ ་རི་
བསྟན་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
གླིང་གི་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོ་ང་ཞའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་བསྟན་པར་ང་ཞུ་ལ་མནའ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
གཡས་པ་རི་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཉེ་རང་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
དེ་རི་ཟུན་ཏེ་སྐྱོད་ན་འབྲོང་དེ་ཐོབ་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང་། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་འཐད་ནས་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་
བཏབས་པ། མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ་དག་མཁྱེན་ལོ། མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་
དག་མཁྱེན་ནོ། དག་ས་ཚུག་པ་ཏུ་བག་ལ་སྐད་ཅིག་བིང་བ་མི་འདག། སྐད་དེ་
མ་བིང་པ་སང། སེམས་ཅན་མང་པོ་ཤི་རུག། དག་ས་ཏཱ་བག་ལ་སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་
ཞིག་བིང་ཤིག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཕར་ལ་དུ་བག་ལ་སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་ཐོན་སོང་
བས། དེ་ནས་ཕར་ལ་སེམས་ཅན་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཕན་ཐོགས་ཤིག་ཡོངས། ཅི་ཕན་
ཟེར་ན། ནམ་དུ་བག་ཅིག་བཏང་ན། སེམས་ཅན་གཅིག་ལ་ཕོག་ན། གཞན་མ་
ཚང་མ་ལ་སྐད་ཚོར་པ་སང། ཤོར་ཏེ་སྲོག་འབུད་འདུག། དེ་ནས་དེ་ལྷ་སྐྱིན་
ཚང་ཀ་འཐད་དོན་ཞིག་ལོག་སྟེ་རི་ལ་སོང།།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་རི་གཡས་པ་ཟུན་ཏེ་འཛགས་དེ་སོང་པ་སང།

109
འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི་དེ་རི་ཞིག་གི་ཁ་མགོ་བཀལ་ཏེ། རི་ཞིག་གི་ཁ་རྐང་པ་བོར་ཏེ་
གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་འཇིགས་ཏེ། ཕོ་ལོང་ཞིག་གི་
ཡོག་ལ་ཡིབ་སྡེ་ན། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར །
ཨ་བ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཉིད་རང་འབྲོང་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི་དེ་འབྲོང་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་ནི་མི་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
མི་ཆུང་ང་རང་ད་མི་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ང་དང་དཔོན་པོ་གཉིས་ཀ་དེ་མཛའ་བོ་ཞིག་ཟུམ་ཡིན།
མི་ཆེན་འབྲོང་ཆེན་གཉིས་ཀ་མཛའ་བོ་ཞིག་བཅོ་ཡིན།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། འབྲོང་ཆེན་དེས་གཉིད་ཀྱི་
ནང་ནས་མགོ་ཅིག་ཅོག་བཅོ་འད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་ནས་བསམ།
འབྲོང་དེ་གཉིད་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་འདུག། ང་ཉེ་མོ་ཞིག་ལ་ཆ་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ་སོང་སྟེ་
ཡང་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཨ་བ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་དེ་འབྲོང་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཡིན་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི་དེ་འབྲོང་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་ནིང་མི་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ རིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ངའི་རྟ་ཆུང་དེ་ནི་རྟ་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་དེ་རྟ་བརྒྱའི་དཔོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ང་དང་ཚང་ཀ་མཛའ་བོ་ཞིག་མི་ཟུམ་མ།

io
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། འབྲོང་དེས་མགོ་སྟག་སྟེ། མགོ་ཙོག་ཙོག་བཅོས་པ།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་འབྲོང་གི་རུ་ཅོ་མཐོང་སྟེ་མང་པོ་འཇིགས་ཏེ་ཟེརས།
ཨ་བ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་དེ་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི་དེ་ངའི་གཏམ་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཨ་བྲ་ཉེ་རི་རུ་ཅོ་ལ་ང་ལ་འཇིག་འཇིག་རིག་རིག་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཉེ་རི་རུ་རྩོ་གཡས་པ་ཕུད་དེ་བཏང་ན་ལོ།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རི་མདའ་མགོ་གཡས་པ་བོ་ཕུད་དེ་བཏང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། འབྲོང་དེ་བདེན་ཆེས་དེ་རུ་ཅོ་གཡས་པ་ས་
ལ་རྟེན་ནས་ཕུད་དེ་ཕངས་པས། ཡང་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་སྲུག་གིས་ཟེརས་པ།
ཨ་བ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་ལེ་ཉེ་རི་རུ་ཅོ་གཡོན་པ་ལ་འཇིགས་ས་རག།
ཉེ་རང་གི་རུ་ཅོ་གཡོན་པ་ཕུད་དེ་བཏང་ན། །
བུ་ཚ་ང་རི་གཞམ་མགོ་གཡོན་པ་བོ་བཅག་ཡིན།
ཇེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། རུ་ཅོ་གཡོན་པ་ཡང་ཕུད་དེ་ཕངས་པས།
དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་འབྲོང་དེ་ཕ་སྐལ་བཅོས། མོ་ངན་
ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་བུ་སྐལ་བཙོ་སྡེའདགས། མཚན་ལ་གཉིད་ལོག་ཙ་ན། འབྲོང་
གི་རྣ་མཆོག་ནང་དུ་འདག་གད་ཚུག[ ཞག་ཅིག་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཁ་རའི་
ད་ཀྱི་ཞིག་ཟོས་དེ། དུ་རུམ་དུ་རུམ་བཅོས་པ་སང། འབྲོང་ཆེན་གྱིས་ཟེརས།
ལྔ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་འདི་རིང་ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་ཅི་འད་ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་
ཕྲུག་གིས། ཨ་བ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་ལེ། འདི་རིང་ངས་ང་རང་གི་མིག་གཡས་པ་
ཕིང་སྟེ་ཟའད་པ། མ་ཞིམ་པོ་ཞིག་དྲག་ཟེརས་པ། འབྲོང་གིས་ཟེརས། ང་ལ་

11
ཙ་བིག་དང༌། ངས་མྱོང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཁོ་རའི་ད་
ཀྱིར་ཞིག་བཏངས། འབྲོང་གིས་དེ་བོ་ཟོས་ཏེ་མ་ཞིམ་པོ་ཞིག་ཚོར་ཏེ། ལྔ་མོ་
ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག། ངའི་མིག་པོ་ཡང་ཕིང་སྟེ་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་
ཕྲུག་གིས། འབྲོང་དེའི་མིག་གཡས་པ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ཕང་སྟེ། ཚབས་ལ་ཁ་ར་ཞིག་
ཟ་ལ་བཏངས། འབྲོང་ལ་མ་ཞིམ་པོ་ཚོར་ཏེ་ཡང་ཟེརས། ལྔ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག།
འདི་བོ་མ་ཞིམ་པོ་ཞིག་རག། ཡང་མིག་གཡོ་མ་ཡང་ཕིང་སྟེ་དོང་ཟེརས་པ།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་མིག་གཡོ་མ་ཡང་ཕེངས། དེ་ནས་འབྲོང་ཆེན་ལ་མི་
མཐོང་ཅེས་སོང་པ་སང། 
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཞག་དང་ཞག་དག་ཚུ་དང་
དག་ཆུ་རེ་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག་བོརས་པ། འབྲོང་ཆེན་དེ་ཞག་དང་ཞག་གླེན་པ་ཞིག་
སོང། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་གིས་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི།
ཉེ་རང་གླེན་གླེན་སོང་དོག་པ། ཅི་ཞིག་རག་ལེ། འབྲོང་གིས། ང་ཞག་དང་
ཞག་གླེན་པ་ཞིག་ཆ་རག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཡང་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས། ཨ་བ་
རང་ལ་གྲིབ་ཅིག་སོང་མཁན་ཡིན་ནོག། ངས་སངས་ཤིག་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ།
ཤིང་དྭམ་བུ་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་བཙོ་སྟེ། འབྲོང་དེ་ལང་བཅུག་སྡེ་གྲོད་པའི་ཡོག་ལ་བོར་
དེ་མེ་ཞིག་བཏུག་སྟེ་ཁོས་ཀུ་ཅོ་བཏང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། སང་ངོ། སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ། བར་
བཙན་ཡུལ། འོག་ཀླུ་ཡུལ། སང་ངོ་ཟེར་ཏེ། འབྲོང་གི་སྤུ་ཁ་ཚང་མ་མེ་ལ་
བདུག་སྟེ་མན་ན་མེད་མཁན་བཅོས། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ས་དོང་ཆེན་
མོ་ཞིག་བཙོ་སྟེ། དེ་ལ་ཐོག་སྲབ་མོ་ཞིག་བཙོ་སྟེ་བོརས་ནས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་རོ།།
ཨ་བ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཁྱོད་དིས་ད་ཉོན་དང།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རིས་འང་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང༌

112
འདི་རིང་ང་དང་གིས་རྩེན་མོ་ཞིག་རྩེན་ལོ།
ཕ་བུ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཡངས་པ་ཞིག་རྩེན་ལོ །
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་ཤོར་ཚུལ་ཞིག་བཅོ་ཡིན་ལོ །
ཨ་བ་ཉེ་རང་གིས་འདེད་ཚུལ་ཞིག་ཆོས་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། འབྲོང་དེ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོད་མི་ཡུལ་
ལི་མི་དེ། ཁྲེལ་མེད་མཁན་འདུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཀ་ཅོ་དྲག་པོ་ཞིག་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག་
དེད་བཏིངས་པ། གོམ་པ་གསུམ་བཏང་སྟེ་ན། འབྲོང་ཆེན་རི་རི་དེ་ས་དོང་ནང་
ད་བུད་དེ་སོང། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་མགྱོགས་པ་ཡོང་སྟེ། མདའ་དང་
མདང་གྲུབ་སྟེ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་དེ་ནང་དུ་བསད་བཏངས། ལྤགས་པ་དེ་ཤཱ་ཅེས་ལ་
མགོ་སྐྱུག་པ། ཡང་ཤེས་པ། ཡང་གསོབ་སྟེ་ ། མ་ཉན་བ། དེ་ནས་ནམ་
མཁའ་ན་ཕོ་རོག་པོ་མ་གཉིས་ཕུར་ཏེ་ཆའད་ཚུག། དེ་གཉིས་ཀས་དཔེ་ར་ཞིག་
བཏངས། མོ་ཕོ་རོག་དེས་ཕོ་པོ་རོག་ལ་ཟེརས། ལྔ་པོ་ཕོ་རོག། དེ་མི་
ཡུལ་ལི་མི་ལ་ལྟོས་འང། འབྲོང་དེ་བསད་པ་ཤེས། ཤུ་ཅེས་དེ་མ་ཤེས་པ་
ཡིན་ནོག། པོ་ པོ་ རོག་གིས་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཤ་ཆེན་ལྔ་ཟེརས་པ།
མོ་པོ་རོག་གིས། དེ་ཟུག་ལ་ཤུ་ན། ཁོ་ལ་ཟླ་བ་གཅིག་ལ་ཤ་མི་ཚར།
ཙ་ཐིག་ཤ་འིན་ཞིག་དང་གསེད་དི་བུར་ཆ་ཞིག་རྒྱབ་ན། དེ་ནས་མགྱོགས་པ་ཤ་
ཚར་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་ཟུག་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་བྱ་སྐད་གོ་སྟེ་གསེད་དི་བུར་ཆ་
ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ། ཤུ་ཡི་ཚིར་དང་བུར་ཆ་རྒྱབས་པ། དེ་ནས་སླ་མོ་ཞིག་ལ་ཉན་
སོང། ཤ་ཚང་མ་བོར་ཏེ། ལྤགས་པ་དེ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ལ་བཀལ་ཏེ་གླིང་
ཡུལ་ལ་ཁྱོངས་པ། དེ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་མཁར་ལ་ཁྱེར་ཏེ་བཏིངས་པ་སང། གླིང་

11
མཁར་དང་ཡུལ་ཚང་མ་ཁྱེད་དེ། འདོམ་དག་ལྷག་མ་ལུས། དེ་ནས་ཡང་བོ་ངན་
ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ཐོབ་ཟེར་ཏེ་ལྕང་མཁན་ཚང་མས་ཀུ་ཅོ་བཏངས།།
No. 6.
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཡབ་བརྟན་པ་དང་ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་སྐྱོན་བཅོ་སྡེ་
ཟེརས། དེ་ལ་མི་བཏང། བུ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་གི་ཤོགོ་པ་ཞིག་སུས་ཁྱོང་ན།
དེ་ལ་ངའི་བུ་མོ་བག་མ་ལ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཡང་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་
མ་བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁུང་རུང་གི་ཤོག་པ་འཁྱོང་བ་ལུང་པ་སོ་སོའི་ནང་ད་སོང་བས
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་དེ་བུ་ཚང་མའི་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང། དེ་ལམ་ཐོག་ཏུ་དག་ཤ་ཕོག
ལོང་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། 
མི་ཚང་མ་དེ་ཕོ་ལོང་ལ་འཁོར་ཏེ་མེན་བ་ཆ་ཉན་བ་མེད་ཚུག་
འཁོར་ཏེ་ཆ་ན། ཟླ་བ་གཅིག་གི་རིང་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་
ལམ་དྲང་པོ་ཟུན་ཏེ་སོང་བས། 
དུག་ཤ་ཕོ་ལོང་གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ། རྐྱང
རྒོད་དབྱེར་པའི་ཁ་ཞོན་ཏེ། ཕོ་ལོང་དྲི་ཁ་སོང་སྟེ། གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་སོ།
ཝ་དག་ཤ་ཕོ་ལོང་ཁྱོད་ཉོན་དང་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་དུག་ཤ་ཕོ་ལོང་གིས་ཉོན་དང་ལོ།
ང་ལ་བདུད་ཅུ་རུ་ལུ་བ་ཀུན་བཏུལ་ན།
ཤར་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་པ་བདུན་ཟམ་ཏོང།
ང་ལ་གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུའི་མགོ་རི་ལྡན་ན།
ནབ་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་པ་བདུན་ཟམ་ཏོངོ།
ང་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་མོ་གྲོགས་ལ་ཐོབ་ན།
བྱང་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་པ་བདུན་ཟམ་ཏོང།
16

114
ང་ལ་བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་གི་ཤོག་པ་ཐོབ་ན།
ལྷོ་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གོམ་པ་བདུན་ཟམ་ཏོང།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་ཕོ་ལོང་ལ་སྣ་ལོ་བརྟག་སྟེ། ཕོ་ལོང་གིས་ཤར་དང་ལྷོ་
ནུབ་བྱུང། ཕྱོགས་བཞི་རུ་གོམ་པ་བདུན་རེ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་མི་དང་བྱ་རིགས།
འགྲུལ་མཁན་ཚང་མ་ལ་གནོད་པ་མི་སྐྱལ་ཅས་སི་ཕི་ལ་མནའ་བོར་དེ་ན། མོ་ངན་
ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་སོང་སྟེ། ཁོ་བྱ་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ། བལྟ་ཟ་ན། མདའ་གང་ས་
དང་མ་ཐུག་པ། མདའ་གང་གནམ་དང་མ་ཐུག་པའི་ཁང་པ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག།
དེ་ཁང་པ་ལ་སྒོ་དཀར་ཁང་མེད་ཚུག། བི་གང་ཆུང་ངུན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་འི་
ནང་ན་བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་གི་གཞིད་དམད་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་
ཁང་པའི་བི་གང་པོ འི་མདུན་ན་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།།
མདའ་གང་ས་དང་མ་ཐུག་པའི་ཁང་པའི་ནང་དུ་སུ་ཡོད་ལོ།
མདའ་གང་གནམ་དང་མ་ཐག་པའི་ཁང་པའི་ནང་ན་མི་ཆེན་སུ་ཡོད་ལོ
འདི་རིང་བུ་ཚ་ང་ཐང་དེ་ལ་ལུས་དེ་ཡོད་ལ།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཐང་སྟོང་ལ་ལུས་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་བྲང་ས་ཞིག་ཆོས་འང་ལེ། །
དེར་ཟ་བའི་འདྲེ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ད། སྲུང་བའི་ལྷ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། དེའི་ནང་ནས་ལན་དུ་བྱ་མོ་དཀར་མོས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར །།
ཁྱོད་མི་ཡུལ་ལི་མི་ཆུང་གིས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཁྱོད་མི་ཡུལ་ལི་ཕྲུ་གུས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
གནམ་ལྟར་རི་བྱ་ཡང་ལྡིངས་ས་རིག་མེད་ལོ།

115
འོག་ལྟར་རི་མི་ཡང་ལྡིངས་ས་རིག་མེད་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་ཚུག་པ་མིའི་སྐད་ཅིག་མ་ཚོར་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་ཚུག་པ་བྱ་སྐད་ཅིག་ཀྱང་མ་ཚོར་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་མི་ཆུང་དེ་འདི་རུ་ག་ཟུག་ལ་བསླེབ་ལོ།
ངས་བྲང་ས་བཅོ་བ་ལ་ཉན་ཅེས་རིག་མེད་ལོ།
ང་ལ་བིང་བས་མི་སྒོ་ཞིག་མེད་ལོ།
ཏེ་རང་ཡོང་ཅེས་སི་ལམ་ཞིག་མེད་ལོ།
ཁྱོ་རང་ཡོང་ན་བྱ་ཚངས་མ་བཤིག་པ་ཡོང་ལོ།
ཁྱོ་རང་ཡོང་བ་ཉན་ན་བྱ་སྒོང་མ་བཅག་པ་ཡོང་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་ཤོག་པ་ཡོད་ན་འཕུར་ཏེ་རིག་ཡོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། 
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཕུ་རོན་ཞིག་ལ་རྫུ་སྟེ་
ཕུར་ཏེ། དེ་བི་བགང་ནང་ནས་ཞུག་སྡེ་སོང་སྟེ་ནང་དུ་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་
གཉིས་ཀས་ཡངས་པ་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཞིག་དང་ཟླ་བ་གཅིག་ཟམ་འདུགས།།
ཞག་ཅིག་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་མཁས་པ་བཙོ་སྟེ། བྱ་མོ་དཀར་
མོ་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། ལྔ་བ་མོ་དཀར་མོ་ལེ། བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་དེ་དག་ས་ག་རུ་
ཡོད་ཚུག་ཟེརས་པ། བྱ་མོ་དཀར་མོས། བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་དེ་ཟླ་དང་ཉི་མའི་
བར་ལ་མཚམས་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ་ཡོད། ཁོའི་ནོ་བྱ་སོ་མིག་དམར་དེ་བྲག་སྟོད་ཅིག་
ལ་ལམ་སྲུང་ང་ལ་བོར་ཏེ་ཡོད། བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་ལ་མཚམས་ཀྱི་ཞག[ཞཚང་
བ་དང། མི་ཡུལ་ཚང་མ་བཤིག་པ་ཡོང་ཆེན། ཁོ འི་ཤ་ཚང་མ་ཕོ་ལད་་
འགྱུར་ཆེན། ཁོའི་གྲོད་པའི་ནང་དུ་ནུར་བུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། གསེར་ དངུལ་

i
ཐངས་ ལྕགས་ དྲུང་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཡོང་ཆེན། དྲུང་ན་ཁོ་སུ་ལ་ཡང་བསད་
པ་མི་ཉན་ཅེས་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཡང་འདྲིས། ཁོའི་
མཚམས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་ག་ནམ་གང་ཡིན་ཟེརས། བུ་མོ་དཀར་མོས། ཞག་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩག་
གཉིས་ན་མཚམས་ཀྱི་ཞག་འཚང་བྱས་ཡིན། དེ་ཚུག་པ་ཁྱོ་རང་སོང། སྔོན་ལ་
བྱ་སོ་མིག་དམར་བསད་དགོས། དེའི་དྲུང་ན་བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་བསད་ཐུབ་ཡིན་
ཐེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་སོང་བས། ཞག་བདུན་འགྲུལ་ཏེ།
བུ་མོ་མིག་དམར་ཡོད་ས་ཡི་བྲག་གི་དེ་རུ་བསླེབ། དེ་རུ་བྲག་གི་བ་ཧོ་ཞིག་གི་
ནང་དུ་ཡིབ་སྟེ་འདུགས་པ། དེ་མཚན་ལ་བྱ་སོ་མིག་དམར་ལ་རྨི་ལམ་མང་
པོ་ཞིག་མཐོང་བས། གནམ་མ་ལངས་པ། བྱ་སྐད་དང་པོ་བཏང་ངན་ཞིག།
བྱ་སོ་མིག་དམར་གྱིས་གླུ་འདི་ལྷར།།
འདི་རིང་མཚན་ནི་སྤྱི་ལམ་ངན་པ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
མཚན་ངན་ཉིད་དེ་སྙི་ལམ་ངན་པ་ཐག་ཆོད་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཨ་ཡི་བྲག་གི་ལྷུང་ན་རྡ་མི་གཉིས་ཡོང་བ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
བྱ་སོ་མིག་དམར་ང་རང་ཤི་བ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ ། །
ཏིང་ན་བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་ཤི་བ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་གི་ཤོག་པ་དེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་མཐོང་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་གི་མཚན་པོ་ངན་པ་ཞིག་རག་ཀྱི་ཀྱི།
འདི་རིང་གི་སྙི་ལམ་རྩོག་པོ་ཞིག་རག་ཀཱང་ཀུང༌།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་བསམ། འོ་མི་སྟོ།
ཁོ་ཤི་ཅེས་སོང་བསམ་སྡེ་མང་པོ་འཐད་སོང། དེ་ནས་གནམ་ལངས་ས་དང།

17
བྱ་སོ་མིག་དམར་བྲག་ཅིག་གི་ཁ་བིང་བ་སང! མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་མདའ་
རྒྱབ་སྟེ་བྱ་དེ་བསད་བཏངས།།
ཁོ་གྱེན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། ནམ་མཁའི་ལྟོངས་ན་གུར་མཚོགས་
ཤིག་མཐོང་ངད་ཚུག། དེའི་ནང་ན་བུ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་ཡོད་ཚུག། མོ་ངན་ནི་
སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཉེ་བོ་ཤག་རིངས་ལ་ཡོད་ཅེས་ཤེས་ཏེ། ནང་ང་ཚོར་ཏིང ཁོ་ང་ལ་
མ་ཐུབ་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ་ཡི་མུག་སྟེ། ཕུ་ཐུངས་གཅིག་གི་ནང་དུ་མགོ་བཏངས།
གཅིག་གི་ནང་དུ་རྐང་པ་བཏང་སྡེ་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་འདུགས། ཞག་བདུན་ཟམ་
སོང་སྟེ། ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། དབུགས་མེད་དེ་སྒྲ་ཐོས་ནས་གླུ་
ཞིག་འདི་ལྟར། །
མདའ་ཁྱོད་དཀར་པོས་ལམ་བསྟན་འགྲོ་དགོས་འབྱུང།
བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་བསད་ཅེས་ལ།
མདའ་ནག་པོས་སྲོག་བཅད་འགྲོ་དགོས་འབྱུང།
མདའ་དམར་པོས་ཁྲག་ལྔགས་འགྲོ་དགོས་འབྱུང༌།
བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་བཏུལ་ཅེས་ལ།
ཁྱོད་ཚང་ཀས་བྱ་དེ་བསད་རོགས་མཛོད།
ཁྱེད་ཚང་ཀས་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་རུང་བདུལ་རོགས་མཛོད།
ཨ་ནེ་སིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང་། མདའ་ཚང་ཀ་བསག་སྡུག་ནང་
ནས་བིང་སྡེ་ན། ནམ་མཁའི་ལྟོངས་ལ་སྒྲ་ཕིང་གིན་ཞིག་སོང་སྟེ། བྱ་ཉི་མ་ཁྱུང་
རུང་དེ་དུས་གཅིག་ལ་བསད་དེ། ས་སྟེང་དུ་བུད་དེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནེ་
བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སློང་ཕྲུག་ལ་གཉིད་བཙས་པས
། དེ་དེ་ཚུག་

118
པ་ས་ལ་བུད་ཚར་ཏེ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་གཉིད་ཐེ་རལ་ལ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟེ།
ཕོ་ལད་དཀར་པོའི་སྟ་རི་དང་རྡུངས་པ། གྲོད་པ་དེ་ཆད་སོང། དེའི་ནང་ན་ནུར་
བུ་མང་པོ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནོར་བུ་ཚང་མ་ཁྲུལ་ལི་ཁོ་མགས་ནང་དུ་རྒྱང་སྡེ། ཤོག་
བ་ཡང་ཁར་ཏེ། གླིང་མཁར་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཡོངས།
No. 7.
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་དང་ཡུལ་མི་ཚང་མ་ལ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་
དེ་ཚང་མ་འཁར་དེ་ཡོང་ཅེས་ཀྱི་ཧུན་ཚོར་དེ་གསུང་གྲོས་བཙོ་སྟེ། ཁོ་ལ་སུས་
མི་བཏང་བ་རྒྱལ་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཨ་བུ་དཔལ་ལེ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་ལམ་དུ་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་
ཕྲུག་དང་ཐུག། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེས་མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གི་རྐང་པ་ཐམ་སྟེ་ཞུས་པ།
འདི་རིང་ནས་ཕར་ལ་ཉེ་རང་གླིང་གི་མགོ་རི་ཡིན། གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་གེ་སར་
ས 
ཡིནཡིན། ། རྗེ ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲི་གུ་མ་གྲོགས་སྐལ་ཡིན། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་དངོས་བསྟན་ན་མཛད་
ཞུས་བ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་རྒྱལ་མོལ་དེ་ཡོངས། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཙ་བིག་
མ་བསླེབ་པ། རྒྱལ་ལྕང་ལྕང་གི་ལྕང་སྟོད་ཟེར་བའི་ས་ཁྱད་ཅིག་ཡོད་ཚུག།
དེ་རུ་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ ཚང་མ་དང་ཡུལ་མི་དང༌། ཇོ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ཟབ་སྟེ།
དར་དཀར་ཞིག་རིང་དུ། དར་དམར་ཞིག་ཐུང་དུ་བཏང་སྟེ། གཡས་ལ་ཛ།
གཡོན་ལ་ཆང་ཁར་དེ་ཕོག་ཀ་ལྕོར་མང་པོ་དང། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་ཞབ་ཤི་ལ་དུར་ལྷ་
གོ་ཆོད་མོ་ཁྲིད་དེ། བུ་མོ་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་དེ་རུ་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་
མས་གླུ་ཞིག་སླངས}l
རྒྱལ་ལྕང་ལྕང་གི་ལྕང་སྟོད་ན་ལྷ་སྐད་ཅིག་ཚོར།
དེ་བོ་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོའི་གསུངས་སྐད་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།

119
རྒྱལ་ལྕང་ལྕང་གི་ལྕང་སྟོད་ན་ཞབས་སྐད་ཅིག་ཚོར།
དེ་བོ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པའི་ཞབས་སྐད་ཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོས་དབུ་རྨོག་ཀན་བསྣམས་ཙ་ན།
གནམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ལ་ཉི་དྭངས་ཕོག་པ་འདྲ།
གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོས་ནམ་ཟ་བསྣམས་ཟ་ན
མི་ཡུལ་འོད་དེས་ཁྱངས་པ་དང་འདྲ།
རྒྱ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོས་སྐུ་སྐྱེ་རགས་བསྣམས་ཟ་ན།
རི་སྟོད་ལ་ཉི་རྩེ་ཕོག་པ་དང་འདྲ།
རྒྱུ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ནམ་ཙར་བསྣམས་ཟ་ན།
བྲག་སྟོད་ལ་ཆུ་ཆར་ཕག་པ་དང་འདྲ།
སྔོན་ལ་ང་ཟངས་ཀྱི་རི་ནང་ཐུག་སོང།
དག་ས་ང་གསེར་གྱི་རི་ནང་ཐག།
སྔོན་ལ་ང་རོ་ཉའི་རི་ནང་ཐུག་སོང༌།
དག་ས་ང་དངུལ་གྱི་རི་ནང་ཐུག།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་ཇོ་ཇོས་ཀ་ལྕེར་བླུགས་པ
། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ནང་
མ་ཟེར་བ། 
གླིང་སྟོད་ལ་དིབང་བང་ཟེར་བའི་རི་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག
། དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད།
དེ་ཚུག་པ། 
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲག་བཙོ་སྟེ་སྐྱོད་སོང། དེ་རི་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ན།
མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར
གླིང་གི་ཁྱོག་ཐོང་ཚང་མ་འདིར་འདུས་ཤིག
ཁྱེད་ཁྱོག་ཐོང་ཚང་མ་ལ་དངུལ་གྱི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན

1.2()
གླིང་གི་ན་ཆུང་ཚང་མ་འདིར་ཡོང་ཤིག།
ཁྱེད་ན་ཆུང་ཚང་མ་ལ་གཡུའི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན།
གླིང་གི་རྒད་པོ་ཚང་མ་འདིར་ཡོང་ཤིག།
ཁྱེད་རྒད་པོ་ཚང་མ་ལ་དུང་གྱི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན།
གླིང་གྱི་ཨ་མ་ཚང་མ་འདིར་ཡོང་ཤིག། །
ཁྱེད་ཨ་མ་ཚང་མ་ལ་མུ་ཏིག་གི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན།
གླིང་གི་བླ་མ་ཚང་མ་འདིར་ཡོང་ཤིག།
ཁྱེད་བླ་མ་ཚང་མ་ལ་གུར་གུམ་གྱི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན།
གླིང་གི་མོན་ཚང་མ་འདིར་ཡོང་ཤིག།
ཁྱེད་མིན་ཚང་མ་ལ་དྲམ་བུའི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན།
གླིང་གི་གསེར་མགར་ཚང་མ་འདིར་འདུས་ཤིག།
ཁྱེད་གསེར་མཁར་ཚང་མ་ལ་གསེར་གྱི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན།
གླིང་གི་མགར་བ་ཚང་མ་འདིར་འདས་ཤིག།
ཁྱེད་མགར་བ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་འགྱེད་བཏང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་མོལ་ལེན་ཞིག་དང། མི་ཚང་མ་ལ་ནར་བུའི་རིགས་ཚང་མ་
འབུད་བཏང་ཚར་ཏེ། མོ་ངན་ནི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ་མེད་པ། གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་
ལ་གྱུར་ཏེ། མིའི་ཡུལ་ཚང་མ་འོད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱུངས་སོང། དེ་ནས་དྲ་མན་ཧ་རིབ་
སྐྲ་གྲོལ་མོ་བཏང་ངན་ཞིག་གླིང་གི་མཁར་ལ་སྐྱོད་དེ། ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲ་ག་མ་སྒྲོགས་
ལ་བོརས། དེ་ནས་སྐྱིད་པོ་བཙོ་སྟེ་ཞག་བདུན་མཁར་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ་ན། བག་

J1
སྟོན་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་སྔགས། ཁྲོམ་ཆེན་མོ་ལ་འདུས་ནས། བ་ལུ་ཏུང་ཏུང་གིས་
གྲལ་རིག་གིན་ཞིག་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་ཨ་བའི་བག་སྟོན་ཞིག་རིག་ལོ།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་ཨ་མའི་བག་སྟོན་ཞིག་རིག་ལོ།
ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་ཨ་བ་གསེར་ཁྲི་ཁ་ཞུགས་འང།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་ཨ་མ་གཡུ་ཁྲི་ཁ་ཞུགས་འང།
ཕ་སྤུན་བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་ལྔ་གཡས་གྲལ་ལ་ཞུགས་འང།
མ་སྤུན་བཞི་བཅུ་ཞེ་ལྔ་གཡོན་གྲལ་ལ་ཞུགས་འང།
ཐང་དཀར་བབས་པའི་རྒད་པོ་གཞུང་གྲལ་ལ་ཞུགས་འང་།
གྲོ་ཡོས་ཡས་པའི་ན་ཆུང་སྒོར་མོ་གྲལ་ལ་ཞུགས་འང།
སྟག་སོ་རྩིགས་པའི་ཁྱོག་ཐོང་སྐུ་རྗེས་ལ་ཞུངས་འང།
བ་ལུ་དུང་དུང་ང་རང་དུང་ཁྲིའི་ཁ་འདུག་ཡིན་ལ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་གུལ་བདེ་མོ་རིགས། དེ་ནས་ཁྲོམ་སྐྱིད་པོ་ཞིག་བཅོས།
ཁྲོམ་བཤོལ་ཏེ། ཡུལ་པ་ཚང་མ་རང་རང་གི་ཁང་པ་རུ་སོང་ངོ། རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་
ཀེ་སར་དང་ཇོ༌ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་དང་ཞབ་ཤི་ཚང་མ་མཁར་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་སྐྱིད་པོའི་ནང་
དུ་འདུགས་སོ།

ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS .
THE STORY OF 'ABROGOMA' MARRIAGE TO KESAR.
No. 1.
The child (Kesar) went to the teacher Tse dgn, to ask him , who
was his father. The teaclier, knowing that he would come, had ordered
his servants who were cutting grass, to send the child to him . The
servants give the child some food, which he pretended to eat, whilst
hiding it in his sleeve. Then the child fastened a golden ily to a string
and played with it. One of the servants asked to play with the fly.
Because he lost it Kegar asked for a compensation . The fervants said ,
that he had received a compensation already, having got so much food .
Now Kesar opened his sleeve and returned to every one what had been
given to him . Then the servants 
acknowledged themselves to be in
Kegar's debt and brought some beer and a goat to please him . After
that he did tnem a special favor and cut the grass for them in a mira
culous way.
Kesar toc ' the gont before the window of the hermitage and made
preparations to ill it. The teacher asked him not to do so, and Kenar
promised not to kill it, if the teacher would tell him , who was hin
father. Toe dgu advised the boy to go to the plain , with the three
stone-pyramids of black, white and red colour ' because there he would
be told . The teacher had arrived there Aecretly before the boy, and
was now hidden in one of the pyramids. When the child asked his
question, the herroit answered from inside the pyramid, that Aga
Pasang ldan 11 skyes was Kesar's father. Because this was a lie, all the
grass and the trees of the cold valley ' faded at once and became
black , Kesar restored the trees and the grass to life again and went
to the innermost part of the valley, where he found Pasang Idan ru
skyes. This Agu wa Aatonished to be called ' father ' by Kenar. He
was loaded with wood and, being furnished with a noge-ring , was led to
Gog bzang lhamo, where he was introduced as Kegar's father.
No. 2.
The boy (Kesar) heard, that the Agus had decided to distribute
the land g Ling among them . He went to the place of meeting, dressed
like a monk. On the way there he met with Agu d Pulle, who invited
him to take a seat on tiie norse behind him . He did so and caused a host
of lice to attack the Agu, so that the Agu alınost lost his temper.
The boy asked the Agus to let him lieve a part of the land of
Ling, but ihe Agus gave him only the privilege of being present at
every wedding and at every burial and besides that the ford s Byichu
fund the Groma-plain . The boy made use of his privilege, but sang
comic songs at burials and solemo song, at weddings. To keep him
silent, the parties had to give him much money (nor).*
* Compare Spring myth of the Kesar Baga, (Sheh version) No, V. 37.

123
Agu Khrai thung was made ohief of the gLing land, and to him
a Bruguma wag to be given as his wife. The boy went to the ford
Byichu, and when he saw Khrai thung crossing it, he tore him down
from his horse and almost drowned him . Then he exoased his rough
behaviour, saying that he had not known, that the rider was Agu
Khai thung *
No. 3.
Then Kesar went to the Groma-plain to gather Groma-roots.
Maidon 'a Bruguma went there for the same purpose together with her
aervant. She was not guccessful, and her hand-maid asked the street
child (Kasar) to give some Grond-bread to the lady. Ho gave his
bread nader the condition that every bit which was caten, would grow
again, Ag as the case when he ate. Because, however, nothing was
brought back ngain , he teased the maiden, saying : ' When I meet a
dog, the dog shall hear of it ; when I meet a man, the man shall hear
of it. ' +
 et
To please the street-childchild, 'aBrugrtma invited him to & festival
op 
next morning. The boy wout to her hos 
house earlier than anybody else
bone
and hid linolt behind the upper door beam . Wben Whether all the girls were
assembled, a Bruguma told them to shut the door and to thekeep the
street-child away, because he would make everything dirty (rtsogpo).
Then the boy made his appearance on the uppor door-beam .
He touched the heads of the girls, and all of them fell asleep
A neighbour had a she-488 that was with child . He kicked her, and
a foal was born. Ho cut off the foal's head and placed it on the beci
of the girl who wag nearest to the door. Then he opend the windowe
and called up the girls. She wlio was nearest to the door, put the
foal's bond on her neighbour's bed, and so on, until the last of the
girls placed it in 'a Bruguma's goat-skin . When she rose, it fell to the
ground. Then the street-child , making much noise, cried : A donkey's
head was born to maiden 'a Bruguma ! When I meet a dog, the dog
sball hear of it ; when I meet a man, the man shall hear of it ' s
The girl invited the street-child to an engagement-feast (grogs
chang), and the boy went there, carrying one ear, cut from the donkey's
head. Agu Khrai thung wae heated on & golden throne, and all the
other agus were seated on turquoise thrones. The street-child sat on
A wooden cbair at the hend of all beggars. Maidon 'a Brugumu went
before Aga Khrai thung with a pot of beer and said : ' Not touching
tbe pot with your ten fingers, not touching your lotus-mouth, not
. Compare Spring-myth of the Kegar-Saga No. V, 26-86. It is interesting to
see, that Aga Khromo of the Sheh-version is represented by two different Agte in
this Lower Ladakhi version, here by Aga Khrai mgo khra thung, and ia fano. No.
II, by Agu Ka blon Idanpa.
+ As regards this tale and the following, they may be compared to @ pring
myth of the Kesar Saga, No. VI-IX . This tale in particular to No. VI, 1.9. The
quotation when I meet a dog, etc.' seems to bave its origin in the belief of the
Ladakhis that the dog is the most perfect creature next to man ; it is believed to be a
bigher creature than woman. The Ladakhi lamas will gay, that the spirit of the
gods may dwell in a dog, but 
never in a woman.
Compare Spring-myth, No. VI, 10 -16 .
§ Compare Spring-myth (Sheb. Tersion), Additions No. 10 .

124
tasting with the silken knot of your tongue, not swallowing it with the
golden vessel of your throat; take the boer and tea with your soul, and
place it Again on the ground !' The agu took the pot with his hands,
but when he saw the street-child, he became quite confused, and the
pot fell to the ground. Then agad Palle aud all the other agus were
esked to drink , but none of them conld do as required .
When the maiden came before the street-child, he said, "Look
here, lady ! ' and showed her the donkey's ear. Then she addressed
the boy as a ' beggar on a wooden chair, with dirty hands, with a mouth
like a privy, with a tongue like & rasp, And a long throat.' Before
drinking, the street-child rendered a prayer to the Dine lha aud klu
who were born with him , to Bangpo royabzhin, mother Kyabs kun,
1 Jogpo, and to his paternal and maternal deity. Then with his stick stud .
ded with dog's teeth lie threw the pot towards the sky, drank all the
beer and placed the tea-pot filled on the grond. Now all the beggars
made & noise, saying : Our street-child has roceived maideu 'aBrugu .
ma' (as hia bride].*
No. 4 .
'a Bruguma's parents had prepared golden thrope ind a curtain
of white silk for the bridegroom . But bechUBE A Sureet-child had be
come the bridegroom , they exchanged the silken curtain for one of
black goat's hair, and the golden throne for a ragged carpet, which was
spread on tho floor the wrong way. When the boy arrived on a litter
carried by beggars, he sat down wrong way about on the carpet (with
his face towards the wall). For his food he received some flour with
chaff. Father Thonpa was looking away, mother Ngonmo was looking
at the floor, and 'a Breguna was poking the fire. Then the street
child taught the little dog to jump three times in each of the four
directions. Tbis he did and left so much dung, that everybody had to
leave the room on account of the bad smell.
At night the boy received an old hide and was taken to the stren
barn . 'a Bruguma's parents had tigers, leopards and other beasts to
watch the door. The boy cut the hide into many pieces, and left it be
fore the door, together with some bonea. Then he ran away to the
valley Drimo dgu chod. I
Next morning the beggalin came to see the boy, and ag he could
not be fonnd, 'a Bruguma was afraid of the vengeance of the beggara.
She went to Apud Gani, and asked him to cast the lot and to tell her
what had happened to the Atreet-hoy. He said : 'Oh thou girl with
a red mouth, with a red tougue, who art fat in consequence of exting
good food, who art walking about in the streets with a beautiful dress !
The vengeance of the beggars will overtake you ! I do not know the
science of casting lots.' The girl went home crying, but was sent to
Agu d Gani once more with a golden plate, filled with pearle. Now
the agu told her, that she would have to go first to the copper-hill and
to the gold -hill, then to the lead-hill and to the silver-hill, and that
. Compare Spring-myth, No. VI, 17 -19.
# Compare Spring-myth, No. VIII, 1.3.
Compare Spring.myth, No. VIII, 4-6.

125
she wonld have to eat back-wheat and leek-water, later on cakes
and sweet water. In the valley Drimo dou chod there is a littlo cle
vation. On that you must build a wall of dung ; then you will see
him .''
'a Bruguma went home and come back with her servant. In the
pulley Drimo dgr chod she found the street-child who had taken the
beautiful shape (Kesar's body) and was doing some exercise. ( This
kind of exercise was described in ' Birth-story of Kesar, fasc. No. II,
3). It was as if on his right shoulder the sun was rising and on his
left kloalder the moon. The girls laughed when they saw him . Sud
deply a storm came with stow and bail, and Kesar disappeared en
tively. Wlien the rain was gone, he was again the street-child which
ho lind been before. After he had teased the girls, 'a Bruguma entreat
ed him to go home with her ; otherwise the beggars would aveage him
on her.
Having arrived at ' Bruguma's house, the boy took an earthen
pot and cooked some game in it ; bat in the eyes of the girls the meat
appeared to be that of mice (according to Kesar's sorcery). Then he
killed a real monse and put it secretly into the goat-ekin of 'a Bruguma.
When the meat was cooked, he said : "One piece is missing ! Who
is the thief ? ' All present assured bim that no one had stolon any
thing, bat when 'aBruguma rose, the mouse came falling out of her
goat-skin . Again the street-child made & noise and teased her.
No, 5.
They went to the land of gling. Although the ladies had started
before the street-child, the latter arrived beforo them . The agus were
told, 'Lady 'a Bruguna will be given to him who will bring the hide
of the wild yak Riri, and who can spread it over the whole land and
castle of gering in such a way, that a remnant of nine 'acom will re
main ,' 'a Bruguma's mother provided the boy with food, and luis bag
of the skin of a mouse as well as bis nut-sliell held an inmenge amount
of food, whilat 'a Bruguma's bag was filled at once.
Kesar started with his servants Dranggo and Drongge, and in the
evening had his halting-place a short distance from that of the agus.
The agus who did not know the country through which they were
travelling, wished to find out whether there would be wood or water
in the next station. Therefore they sent Agu dPaile to find oat, what
kind of preparations the street-child was making for the next day.
Kesar, knowing that dPable wan listening in a hidden place, told his
Bervants to gather much wood and to take it along to the next station,
Meauwbile Kesar ordered his servants to fill the hides with water, and
to carry them to the next station. Wheu the agus arrived there ladep
with wood, on the second day, they discovered that tliere was much
wood in that place, but no water. All the wood had been carried in
Compare Spring-myth, No. VIII, F. 26. It is evident that this Lower Lada .
khi version contains a great deal more of natore-mythology than the Sheh -Fersion.
This pangage shows plainly, that Keanr's beautiful shape is connected with sunshine,
and bis ngly shape with rain and storm .
Comparo Spring-smyth, No. VIII, 33-11.

126
vain, and they were obliged to ask the street-child to let them have
some water. Each of them received a few drops.
This time they bent Agu Anggar | Tsangepo to the boy's camp to
listen. Again they were deceived, because when they had carried
much water to the next station (according to what the agu lad found
out), they discovered that there was plenty of water, but do wood.
Now they sent Agu dGani to the camp of the street-child, and
ho heard Kesar ordering his servants to open the boxes with the finest
clothes, because to -morrow they would arrive in a town. All the agus
put on their fineat dress, wbilst Kesar was using bis ordinary dress.
There were many thorns on the way, and all the agus arrived in raga
in the town and were despised . Only Keaar was honoured with pencil
cedars and beer-pots, adorned with pieces of butter.*
Whilst the agus were killing much game, Kesar was sleeping.
His servants said they were hungry. Kesar killed a wild goat for them
but forbade them to spill any of its blood. What they could not help
epilling, they licked up at once. On the next day there appeared seven
wild goats, with borns of gold , of silver, of shell, of copper, pearl, of
turquoise and of coral. They entreated Kesar to protect them , other
wise the agus would annihilate their kind. Kesar proniised to help them ,
if they would show him the place of the yak Riri. The wild goats said ,
that they were under a vow not to show that place. All the game they
advised him to go in the direction of the hill to the right. Kesar was
pleased to hear that, and in recognition of their services he prayed to
the gods and nagas, who were born with him : Up to the present day
the weapon for hunting was noiseless (the bow ) ; now the weapon may
produce a loud noise (the rifle) ! ' All animals can hear it, when one
of them is killed and will run away. This will be their advantage.
Formerly they were not warned in such a wayt
Kesar soon fouud the yak Riri and Hattered him much. He called
him his father and said that he, his son, was frightened by his large
horus. The yak readily threw off both his horns, and Kebar went near
Him .
One day Kesar ate some sugur-bread, and when the yak Riri asked
him what lie was eating, he said : ' I took ont by right eye, and I am
eating it. It is very sweet.' The yak wished to taste it, and Keber
gave him some sugar-lread instead. The yak now desired to eat his
owo right eye, which Kegar took out and quickly gave him some sugar
bread iustead. In the same manner the yak also lost his left eye.
Wben he was blind, Kefar gave him only poisonous grass and water,
until the yak became quite dizzy. To be cured, the yak wished to
bring an offering of the peacil-cedar, which Kesar lit onder hin belly,
so that all the yak's skin came off.
* There is a similar tale to that in the Plongolian version of the sag&. (Com
Date I. J. Schmidt'e translation, pp. 74-76 ). But it looks ag if the Mongolian tale
wag & somewhat misunderatood version of the Tibetan talo .
+ It is remarkable that Kesar is said to be the introducer of fire-arms. This
is quite in accordanco with the belief that he wields the word of lightning
Compare Ind. Apt. Lad Sopgg. No. XXIX ,

127
Theo Kenar dug a pit which was covered with a thin roof, and
told the yak to try to catch him . T'he yak made only three steps and
fell into the pit. There he was killed with arrows and a spear. When
Kegar tried to take off the skin, he did not succoed, because it went
back again to the yak's body. Then he heard two crowa speaking with
one another. They said : If that man goes on skinning like that he
will not come to an end within a month. He ought to fasten to the
ground with pegs of Lonicera , whatever little piece is taken off !'
Kegar did according to the advice and succeeded. Ho carried the skin
to the g Ling land, and when he spread it over the land and castle, a
remnant of nine 'arom remained . Again the beggi.rs made a noise and
said : “ The street-child has received Indy ' u Bruguma.*
No. 6.
'aBruguna's parents did not wish to give her daughter to the
street-child , and said : Our daughter will be given to him , who will
bring a wing of the bird Nyima Khyung rung. The agus went to dif.
ferent valleys, but the street-child went to the land of the birds. Mid
way there was the rock Dig sha (poison -flesh ). All ordinary people
had to spend a full month in going round it. But the boy went to its
top and said : ' If I shall be victorious over the devil Curuligh, and if
I shall gain the g Ling-castle, 'a Breguint And a wing of the bird Nyima
Khyung rung, will you, please, make seven steps towards east, went,
north and south . Then he fastened a none-ring to the rock , and the
rock jumped about as required. Kenar admonished the rock not to
do harm to any creature and went to the land of the birds.
There he gaw a house which did not touch the earth or the sky
by an arrow 's length. It hall neither doory nor windows, but a small
hole. In that house thero lived the family of the bird Nyima Khung
ming.t
Kesar asked to be taken in, and Byamo dkarmo (probably the
moon ) answered : He may como io, if he is able to fly, but he
must take care not to destroy neitlier nest nor egy '! Therefore Kesar
took the slape of a dove and entered the house. About a month
he stayed there, enjoying the company of Byumo varno. Then ho
enquired about Nyima khyung rung's abode, and Bipimo karm ) said :
Now lle is living in a hermitage between 31n and moon, and the bird
So mig mer is watching the road to it. When luis days of contine.
ment are finished, he will come to destroy the land of men. 'I
Iu his stomach there are many treasures : gold , silver, copper, iron,
shell, etc. His body will become steel, and then nobody will be able to
. Althongh it would not be advisable to explain every incident of this tale on
the ground of nature-mythology, it loes not look unlikely , that the yak Riri wng
the personification of a cloud in the original version. Here again two versions are
Apparently told one after the other, According to the first version the skin is taken
off by fire, and according to the second by regular skinning.
Does not this house of the birds look almost like the empty space between
the earth and the stars ?
I Thot the gapposed suc-bird will come to destroy the land of men, is an ide ,
which was probably introduced from India,

128
conquer him . He will sit in the hermitage for twenty-two moro days.
Until then you must kill the bird So mig dmar; after him you will be
able to kill the bird Nyima khyung rung.
After seven days' walking Kegar arrived before So mig dmar's
cave. He heard the bird sing, that he had dreamed, how he died hiu .
self, and how the bird Nyima khyung rung was killed. Thop, wlion lie
left big hole, Kegar killed him at once with an arrow .
Kesar saw something like a tont in the height of the sky. This
WAS Nyima khyung rung'e dwelling-place. Because he did not know
how to get there, he went to sleep in sorrow . Ane bkur dmanmo said
with a voice without breath to Kesar'a aitowa of white, black and red
colour : Go and kill the bird .' Therefore the arrow & flew off with a
great noise, killed the bird, and just when the street-child woke up,
the bird fell to the ground. Kenar was still a little drowsy, but opened
the bird's stomach with his are of white steel. All the treasures he
put into his egg-pocket, took one of the wings and started for the
gLing-land.
No. 7.
Wheo the agts and the men of g Ling heard that Kenar was com
ing, they held & council and sent Agu dPalle to meet him . Aga d Palle
said : From this time henceforth thou art the highest bill of gLing,
the godly King Kesar, and 'aBruguma is thy bride ! Please show thy
true Belf to that lady !' Kesar said ' Alright !' And wont. At a place
called top of the king-willow ' (the tree of the world ) he met with
'a Bruguma and many other people who came to greet him . 'aBruguma
Bang : There was a noise like that of many feet, it was caused by
Kyang byung dbyerpa's feet. Wheu thoa [O king), didst put on thy
helmet, it was as if the light of the sun was touchiog the high sky;
when thou didst put on thy garment, it was ee if the land of men was
filled with light; when thou didst put on thy girdle, it was as if the
morning sun was touching the summits; when thou didst put on thy
shawl, it was as if the rain was wetting the rocks. First I went to
the copper-bill; now I am near the gold-hill. First I went to the lead
hill; now I am near the silver hill !' Kosar again took the shape of
the street-child and went to the hill n bangbang. Here he distributed
his treagerea (which he bad found in khyung rung's stomach ). The
young men received the silver the young ladies the turquoises - the old
mon the shells-- the mothers the pearls -- the lamas orsoge flowers-- the
mons some reeds--the gold -smiths some gold - the blaok-emithe some
iron.
# This tale of the conquest of the en by Kesar is possibly to be understood
in tlije way : although the men of ghing could see the gun on the sky during winter,
they noticed that he did not do anything profitable to the earth. They did not
know that the power of the sun depends on the angle of his rays. But they say
that several months later the earth was blessed by the fun. Therefore they con .
cluded that there must exist & power superior to that of the gun (Kesar in hie
nature of a spring god or god of the seasons), which compelled the sun to yield his
treasures. The killing of the sun-bird as well as that of the giante is not to be
takon seriously . They all come to life again, their death seems to express the idea
that the conquest is a complete one.

129
Then again ho took the shape of Kesar, and the whole land of
men was filled with light. They went with music to the gLing castle,
where be received a Bruguma ab his wife, and they remained together
for seven daye.
Then the little dwarfs came and arranged the feast in this way :
Father Thonpa was placed on a golden throne, and mother Ngonmo on
A tarquoise throne, 45 phaspun (male relatives) eat on the right side,
and 45 maspun (female l'elatives) on the left side, the old men, beanti
ful like white eagles, eat in the middle, the girls, beautiful like fresh
parched grain , formed & circle ; the young men, with their beautiful
teeth, rose for a dance, and the little dwarfs sat on thrones of shell.
When the feast was over, all went to their homes, but Kegar and
'a Brigama went to the g Ling-castle and lived there in peace.
VOCABULARY AND NOTES.
No. !.
pars 1 xhambu, a bite (of bread).
thunge, = phu dung, sleeve.
ahall carry [it ] a little ; ycig = a little.
R5** 'adracas, compensate.
351 'adra, compensation.
erre, = zerte, saying.
anyan, said to be tie name as young enyan , well-sounding.
srog khay, responsibility for (somebody's] life.
DE I rgong,= gongba, collar.
99 zer thabs, argument.
281 zama,= rdzama, pot.
gw theyor, a stone-pyramid , erected on hill tops in honour of
the gods.
khas dman, shame, contempt.
17

130
I roge; = sgrogs, help.
25 *30 me btugces, to light a fire, the same as tdugces.
1 Ahol, bad ; eye of a tree.
S T I drimo dgu chod, said to inean 'emoll of dung ;' rame
of 4 valley.
No. 2.
# 3 1 sgoces, = bgodpa, distribute.
T ! ro sna bag sna, a man who is present at burials
and weddings, and who recoives some food in recognition of his presence.
1911 grig, goord; enough.
27 FSV I gonces, clothes.
ER 51 khrai thung, the abridged name of Aga Khrai mgo khra
thung.
T thama, ghore; the 'end ' of the water,
No. 3.
tagi, bread ; the originnl apelling is probnbly takyir ; it be.
came tagit and tagi in Central Ladakh , when the y was lost. Compare
kyirmo = girmo, Rupee.
ar mangnga mi lus, it will remain the less.
W1 ya, exclamation, meaning about 'yes '; it does not express
much respect for the addressed person,
0 5 ohoho, exclamation, expressing contempt.
khrelcas, to feel ghame.
in thoras,=thore, to-morrow .

131
W o istin , a feast with beer ; compare i in Jkachke's diotionary ,
exclamation, expreasing astonishment.
55591 zerradpa, said ; abridged for xerradpin.
455 shangpo, clever.
APENSII yyang-pa, pleasure, games.
relog chong, a kick with the foot.
Fatt) maltse, bed.
ALATI yyog gor, - yyoy khor, or yyog skor , the sheep-skip
wom by ladies.
VITTÄI shaggi khri, a throne made of willow -branches.
59 ' mtho dyuma, "nimefold on the top,' i.e., there were
nine pieces of butter (kalcor) on the top of the beer-pot.
4258 | bzangs, = bzang, good.
5750 dkar nas, white barley ; the best kind of barley .
981 y sun chang, 'the third beer;' when & girl is to be
given to a husband, there re at least three feaste given to the suitors ;
ench about one month after the preceding one. Here two feasts have
been given already ; this is the third.
3 2 bunypa, = punypu, vessel.
1 1 milpa, = midpa, to swallow .
450F pan chung , a little lama of no rank ; compare panpon.
VEKT | srongpo, or srungpo, beggar.
37701 srong phraeg kun, 'you street-child and you other
low-caste people!

182
Kopa8g1 seyagcan, rough.
693 chagra, the privy.
ingmanas, with the long [throat). The ablative is
used here instead of the instrumental.
35541941 spung rogs («groyo), assistauce.
ET wang phas lha mas lha ; in these words the spelling is
incorrect ; the acizal pronunciation , according to Mr. Ribbach's re
searches in Sheh and eh, and my own researches in Khalatso, ia pha
sla and me ela. The forme pha zla and ma zlu are used alternatively
with pha hla and ma hla . (Tbis in the actual pronunciation of tha ).
It is quite possible that in the compounds pha zk and ma zla the ori
ginal form of the vame of the gods (Ha) was preserved ; «la was pro
nounced hla, when all consonants before I became t ; hla was wrongls
written lha, perhaps for graphic renHODA.
1 nang, m dang, with.
No. 4.
WANAW yabs, = yab, father.
waret yolla, = yolba, curtain.
M ATA | philogla , - phyiloyla, perverse in the wrong way.
haggi kha, on brokep branches.
saroi palkyi, dandy, palanquin ; Urda ; pulkyila, like a palki.
Ttanpa, this is the other name of 'aBruguma's father.
khyim shang, the principal part of the room in a house.
honse).
abang, place of the womon (in a 
house ).
gral mgo, place for men (in a 

188
This is the plan of the principal room of a Lower Ladakhi house :
བབ །
འབང་
གལ་
མགོ
ཁྱིམ་ཤང།
11
1 Icin, = lci, dung, urine.
phug rags, barn for broken straw (phob.)
SATA snyalba, pat down ; causative of nyalba.
95 1 shang koy, a skin , used for clothing.
ŽE 5 I dong tog, really.
jung,= pan chung, little lama.
khag, syo 'adra, responsibility for some
body's life.
gemo, = legsmo, good, beautifal.
rany khormo, idler in the streets, is also used for
public woman.'
QATINI 'adzagcas, =adzegpa, climb.

134
lang, - lci lang, dung.
Yyomma, = yyonna, loft,
531 raru, wind.
yya, heap of stones ; (slate ?)
El or 29T1 ruzab, rdzabra, kiud of a mouse.
5 nang nor, riches in the house, (nang).
dicas, = 'athsodpa, to cook.
pogcas, take away (from the stove).
9 : 38 Sathsangcas, to be complete.
te yin , zerpa yin , baid .
TEMI kag and 341 cab, saddedly.
No. 5.
E l jojopa, or jojorangpa, the ladies as a body (of walkers).
2 1 rdea lam a story (not # clayoy) road.
ri, name of a wild yak.
BBW 'akhyedcas, oversbedow , (not only distribute').
TII kraphusse, rat.
don phrona, portion of food.
Drangge, Drongge, names of Kedar's aerrauts ;
till now -8 -days very simple people are called by those names.
657570 | chang rkyal, bides for beer.

135
A sabna, if [we) put on silk (or another beautiful dr388 ).
tenna zain, at the rery enme time.
Idi, elastic piece of wood to throw atones with .
གོས་ནས། goseaཝ, t༠ spill.
2551 sunts, entering, traversing.
5491 tubag, * lupag, gan, rifle.
51 te or ee; as regarda my system of diffsrentiating between
the te and ste of the gerundive : besides thoge Cases where only to is
possible, te is also used, if the present tense of the verb shows an
Already.
Thus I write འཇིགས་ཏེ། bnt བཏང་སྟེ། 1 write ཤེས་ཏེ། bat
ཞུམ་སྟེ།
mgo cog rog, nod with the besd ; instead of daying
yos.
Ty stagste, =btagste, lifting.
OSTALĀTI yahum mgo,=yzhu mgo, bow -head.
N ATIN ] pha skal bcocas, hononr [a man] like a father.
550 | turum , imitates the sound of chewing.
V sangs, offering of pencil-codai.
5 &15 tumbu , probably the original form of dumbu, a cortais
quantity ; see Lad. Grammar, introdaction, tonais.
9551 sangngo, = sangs lo, ballo, an offering !
rlsenmo, A spectacle.

136
steen lo,= rtse yin lo, (we] will play.
a1 yangspa, = vyangspa, spectacle; perhaps related to
dbyanga.
mgo zuigcas, mgo 'adzugpa, begin .
Shop burcha, = bur, bolt, peg.
No. 6.
T335551 bya nyima khyung rung, the bird, the sun khyung
rung, dame of the sun-bird ; compare khyung dkrung.
591 dug, poison, is in variably written tug in my MS. Also the
Ladakhi pronunciation of this word is tug. I suppose that tug is the
original form , and that the tenuis without & protection became a media.
Lad. Grammar, introduction .
QERTA | Idingssa , = Idingspa, Aying one.
E l theanga, Etheang, nest.
བ་ཧོ ། ཆaho, ve.
snyilam , = rmilam , dream , Dr. Stein's Endere-relios liave
the form rmyilam .
D'ul 1575 | kyi kyi, kung kung, imitates the voice of Bya 80
mig dmar.
U ynyid the ral, aleepy, droway ; compare. Jagchko, the
rel.
nurbu, = norbu, jewel.-- I have been collecting words,
showing the change from long or short o to w, or u to o. This is a list
of them :
norbu becomes morbu
mungpo becomes Brongpo
ombu becomes tumbu
dondrub becomes dundruð
buimo 
becomes bomo
numo becomes 
homo
nubo 
becomes 10 (= nobo).

137
In all these cases the vowel of the first syllable in influenced by
the vowel of the second syllable ; it becomes the same which we find
in the second syllable. There seems to exist in Tibetan a law of sound
which is closely related to Professor J. Schmidt's law of Assimilation,
2. proved for Greek. If this Tibetan law of sound should turn out to
be correct, it would follow that the name of '& Brugmo could easily be.
come 'a Brogmo ; but 'a Brogmo could not become a Brugmo; ne., the word
'a Brogmo cannot be accepted as the original form for 'aBrugmo.
FN- N1 kho mages =keo ma, kneplack, bag.
1534 | rkyangeas, fill; probably a causative form of khyangcas ;
both are secondary forms of gangba, skangba.
No. 7.
sus mi, a man who is sent to meet a praon.
arese 5 1 rgyal lang loang, or rgya loang lcang, the 'chief
willow ,' or the 'broad willow ;' the willow of the world, compare Lad.
Songs, No. XXI.
chabshi, = zhabs phyi, servant, service,
dar lhe go chodma, name of 'aBruguma's servant
girl, compare Spring -myth.
21 nam za, = na bæa, clothing.
nyi rtse, literally " san-hill-top '; i.e., the first rays of the
Bon on bigh snow -hills.
n tsar, the ghawl which is placed over the shoulders
when danciog.
51 Ti bang bang, name of a mountain in gring ; seems
to moan 'drenched 
with water ' (bungcas, sbongba).
50sl drumbu, = 'udambu , roed .
18

188
5' | draman,=daman, drum .
5 
harib, clarionet.
TAIN grolmo, or rolmo, musical instrument.
sdags, cansative of 'adegspa, prepare.
981 balu , dwarf.
5555 | tung tung, white.
General Note on the Vocabulary : - Wben writing fasciole No. I and
II, I entered only those word, in my vocabulary which could not be
found in Jäachke's dictionary. Meanwhilo Sarat Chandra Das' dic.
tionary was published, and as I believed that all the material contained
in Jäsohke's dicticiary, besides new matter, could be found in Sarat Cban.
dra Das' dictionary, I decided to enter only those words which were not
contained in Sarat handra Daa' dictionary. However, accidentally I
discovered that ma y West-Tibetan words of Jäsobko'k dictionary
cannot be found in S. Ch. Das' dictionary. Probably they were con
sidered superfluous. Therefore I resamed my old practice and noted
only those words wbich are not given by Jäschke. It is evident that
Jäschke's dictionary cannot yet be treated as a matter of the past,

No. 1.
རྒྱལ་སྐམ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་རྒྱལ་ཁག་བདུན་བདུལ་དེན། རི་དཀར་པོ་ནག་པོ་
དམར་པོ་གསུམ་གྱི་རྩྭ་རུ་མཚམས་ལ་འདགས་པས། ལོ་གསུམ་གྱི་བར་དུ་
འདུག་ཅེས་བཅོས་པ། དེ་ཅི་ལ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ན། རྒྱ་ནག གི་ལམ་མ་ཐོབ་པ་སང།
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བསམ། ང་ལོ་གསུམ་མཚམས་ལ་འདུག་ཡིན། དེ་ནས་རྒྱ་ནག་
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་མཐུ་བཏང་ཡིན། རྒྱལ་ཁག་འཁྲུགས་ན་ང་ལ་ལམ་ཐོབ་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ།
མཚམས་ཡོག་ལ་ར་མ་ཀ་བུ་ ལུ་ཟེར་བ་ཞིག་བོར་ནས་མཚམས་ལ་འདུགས།
དེ་ནས་ལོ་ཕྱེད་འང་གཉིས་སོང་བ་དང། རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ནས་རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་
མཐུ་བཏངས། མཐུ་དེས་རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་མཁར་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཤིག་
ནས། རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཕོག་པས། རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་སྙིང་གཟུགས་ཆེ་བ་ཡོངས་
ནས། ཟན་ཅི་ཡང་ཟ་མ་བཅུགས་པ། ནང་མིག་ནང་ནས་ཕྱི་སྟ་རུ་བིང་མ་ཐུབ།
དེ་ནསམོ་པ་བརྒྱ་ཁྱོངས། རྩིས་པ་བརྒྱ་ཁྱོངས། དབོན་པ་ཚང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ།
མོ་བཏབ་བཅུགས་པས། མོའི་ནང་ནས་འདི་ཟུག་ཅིག་བིང་སོང། ཟུར་མོ་དེ་
གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་སྐྱོན་འདུག། ཀེ་མར་རྒྱལ་བོ་ཁོ་རང་འདིར་སྐྱོད་དེ་
མིན་བ། ཟུར་མོ་དེ་ཕན་ཅེས་མི་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ།།
དེ་ནས་རྒྱལ་པོ་དང་སྐུ་དྲག་མང་པོ་འདུས་ཏེ་གྲབས་བཅོ་སྟེ། རྒྱལ་
པོ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཞུ་ཤོག་ཅིག་ཕུལ་ཅེས་ལ་ཁ་འཆམས་ནས། ཞུ་ཤོག་དེ་མི་ཡིས་

140
འཁྱེར་ན། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བསད་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ། བྱ་མོ་ལྗོར་རེ་ཟེར་ཁན་ཞིག་
དང་བཀལ་བས། 
བྱ་དེས་ཡི་གེ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་ཀེ་སར་རི་མཚམས་ཁང་གི་དཀར་
ཁང་ནང་དུ་ཕངས། དེ་ནས་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཡི་གེ་གསིལ་པ། ཡི་གེ་ནང་
དུ་འདི་ཟུག་བྲིས་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཉེ་རང་ལ་ཟན་དགོས་ནའང། ནོར་དགོས་ནའང༌།
གསེར་མུལ་ནོར་བུ་ཅི་དགོས་ཕུལ་ཡིན། ཉེ་རང་མ་སྐྱོད་ན 
རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ་
མི་པན་ཅེས་འདག་ཟེར་ཏེ་འདུག་པ། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བསམ། མི་ཞིག་
མ་ཡོང་ན། ང་མི་ཆ། ལམ་ཡང་མི་ཤེས་བསམ་སྟེ་མ་སྐྱོད ། །
རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཐེབ་ཟུརལོ་མང་པོ་ཡོད། དེ་ནས་རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་
པོས་རང་གི་ལག་པ་བཅད་དེ་ཁྲག་ཕང་སྟེ། ས་ཞིག་རུ་སྡེ་མི་བཅོ་སྟེ། དེ་བོ་ལ་
དབུགས་བཅུག་སྟེ་ཡང་ཡི་གེ་ཞིག་བཀལ། དེ་མིས་ཡི་གེ་དེ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ། ཀེ་སར་
གྱི་མདུན་ལ་ཕང་སྡེ་ན། མི་དེ་སྦྱོར་སོང། 
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཡི་གེ་ལ་བལྟ་སྟེ་བསམ་
བློ་པཏངས་པ། 
ང་རང་ཆ་ན་མཚམས་ལ་འདུག་ཅེས་ཀྱི་ལོ་མ་ཚང
། དི་ཚུག་
པ་ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་བཏང་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ
། ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་
ཁྲའི་ཐུང་རང་གི་རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་ནས་སོང་བས
། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་ལམ་མ་ཤེས་པ། མུན་
འཁོར་ཡོང་གིན་ཞིག་ལུས་སོང། 
དེ་ནས་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ལོ་གསུམ་སོང་
བ་དང། 
ང་རང་ཆ་དགོས་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ། 
མཚམས་གཡོག་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ར་
མ་ཀ་བུ་ལུ་བསད་དེ། བྱ་ཞིན་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་ན། ཀེ་སར་ཡབ་བསྟན་པ་དང་
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་ཀླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏུངས
རི་ལུངས་ཆུད་པའི་ཕུག་རོལ་རིག་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བྲ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན

141
བྱེ་ཐང་ཆུད་པའི་རྐྱལ་བུ་རིག་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན
ལྕངས་པོ་ཆུད་པའི་བུང་པ་རིག་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱག་པོ་ཡིན
ཤིག་གི་རྒྱས་པ་ཆུན་ཅིག་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབས་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན
སྦྱར་པ་དམར་པོ འི་ཁོང་ཁྲག་རིག་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབ་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱག་པོ་ཡིན།
གསེར་གྱི་གསེར་ཕེ་ཁལ་ཅིག་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་པ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབ་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱག་པོ་ཡིན།
སྲིན་མོ་རོ་ན་མོའི་འགྲམ་མཚལ་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབ་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན
སྲིན་པོ་རག་ཤའི་ལག་པ་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབ་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན།
ཉི་མའི་ཉི་གཟེར་ལག་པ་གང་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབ་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱག་པོ་ཡིན།
ཟླ་བའི་ཟླ་གཟེར་ལག་པ་གང་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བྲ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབ་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན
དར་གྱི་ཐལ་བ་བྲེ་གང་ཡོད་ན།
ཨ་བྲ་རང་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན་ཡབ་ཐོན་པ་ཕྱུག་པོ་ཡིན།

142
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དེ་བྱུག་འདྲིས་པ་སང། ཡབ་ཐོན་པས་ལན་ད་གླུ་འདི་
ལྟར་བདངས།
གླིང་གི་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་གྱིས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀི་སར་གྱིས་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན།
རི་ལུང་ཆུད་པའི་ཕུག་ཅེལ་དེ་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
བྱེ་ཐུང་ཆུད་པའི་རྐུལ་བུ་དེ་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
ལུངས་པོ་ཆུད་པའི་བུང་པ་དེ་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
ཤིག་གི་རྒྱུས་པ་ཆུན་ཅིག་དེ་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
སྦྱར་པ་དམར་པོ འི་ཁོང་ཁྲག་དེ་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
གསེར་ཕེ་ཁལ་གཅིག་དེ་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
དར་གྱི་ཐལ་བ་བྲེ་གང་དེ་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
ཉི་མའི་ཉི་གཟེར་ལག་པ་གང་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
ཟླ་བའི་ཟླ་གཟེར་ལག་པ་གང་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
སྐར་མའི་སྐར་ཚོགས་ལག་པ་གང་ང་ལ་ཡོད།
སྲིན་མོ་རོ་ནི་མོའི་འགྲམ་བ་ང་ལ་མེད།
སྲིན་པོ་རག་ཤའི་ལག་པ་ང་ལ་མེད།
དེ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་་ལ་གྲང་གི་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་སོང།
དེ་རུ་ངའི་ཨ་ཞང་གཅིག་མཚམས་ལ་ཡོད།
དེ་མེ་མེ་ལ་སྲིན་པོ འི་ལག་པ་ཐོབ་ཡིན།
མེ་མེ་མཚམས་པ་ལ་སྲིན་མོ འི་འགྲམ་པ་ཐོ་ཡིན།

145
ཡབ་ཐོན་པས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་པ། རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀ་སར་ལུང་པའི་ནང་སོང་སྟེ། །
མཚམས་ཁང་གི་མདུན་ནས་མེ་མེ་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།།
ངའི་མེ་མེས་འང་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
མེ་མེ་མཚམས་པས་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་།
ངའི་ཨ་བ་ཐོན་པས་ལོན་ཅིག་བཀལ་ཏེ་ཡོད།
ཡབ་ཐོན་པས་ལོན་ཅིག་བཀལ་ཏེ་ཡོད།
སྲིན་མོ་རོ་ནེ་མོའི་འགྲམ་བ་ཉེ་རང་ཇི་ལག་ལ་ཡོད་ལོ།
སྲིན་པོ་རག་ཤུའི་ལག་པ་ཉེ་རང་གི་ལག་ཏུ་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེ་གཉིས་ཀ་ཡོད་ད་མེད། ཁ་བར་རིག་ཤོད་ལོ།
མེ་མེས་ལན་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏིངས།
ངའི་ཚ་བོས་འང་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོས་འང་བདག་ལ་གསན་དུང།
སྲིན་མོ འི་འགྲམ་བ་ངའི་ལག་ཏུ་མེད་ལོ།
སྲིན་པོ འི་ལག་པ ངའི་ལག་ཏུ་མེད་ལོ།
དེ་གཉིས་བཙལ་བ་ངའི་ཁྱིའུ་བཏང་ཡིན།
ཉེ་རིང་ཞག་བདན་སྲིང་དགོས།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། མི་མེ་མཚམས་པ་ལ་ཟངས་ཀྱི་ཁྱིའུ་གཉིས་ཀ།
སྲིན་མོ་ རོ་ནི་དང། སྲིན་པོ་རག་ཤ་གཉིས་ཀ་འོང་བ་ལ་བཏུངས་པ། དེ་ཚུག་
པ་ཀེ་སར་དང་མེ་མེ་གཉིས་ཀས་ས་དོང་ཞིག་བྲ་སྟེ། རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀེ་སར་མདའ་དང་
གཞུ་ཁུར་ནས། དེ་ས་དོང་ནང་དུ། དཀར་ཁུང་ཆུང་ངུན་ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཡིབ་སྡེ་

འདུགས་པ། ཞག་བདུན་སོང་བ་དང། ཟངས་ཀྱི་ཁྱིའུ་གཉིས་ཀས་སྲིན་པོ་དང་
སྲིན་མོ་གཉིས་ཀ་རིའི་ཤུ་བ་འཁྱོང་བ་ལྟར་བཀུག་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས་པ། ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་
པོ་ནས། མགྱོགས་པ་མདའ་དང་གཞུ་ཕིང་སྟེ། ས་དོང་གི་དཀར་ཁང་ནང་ནས་
མདོའ་བཏངས་པ། སྲིན་པོ འི་ལག་པ་དང། སྲིན་མོ འི་འགྲམ་བ་སྲབ་ཅིག་ལ་
ཐོབ་སོང་། སྲིན་པོའི་ལག་པ་དང། སྲིན་མོའི་འགྲམ་བ་བོར་ཏེ། སྲིན་པོ་དང་
སྲིན་མོ་ཤོར་དུ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་སྲིན་པོ འི་ལག་པ་དང་། སྲིན་མོའི་
འགྲམ་བ་ཁར་ཏེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་རང་གི་རྟ་རྐྱང་བྱུང་དབྱེར་པ་ཁྲིད་དེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་
འབྲི་གུ་མ་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཟེར་བ། མདའ་དང་གཞུ་ཁར་ཏེ་རྒྱ་ནག་ཕྱོགས་ལ་སོང་།།
No. 2.
དེ་ནས་ཞག་གངུ་མ་སོང་བ་དང། རི་མཐོན་པོ་ ཞིག་ལ་བསླེབ་པས།
དེ་རུ་ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་ལམ་མ་ཐོབ་པར་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཁམ་བ་
ཞིག་བཟོ་སྟེ་སོང་ནས། ཨ་གུ་ལ་གཏམ་ལན་ལ་ཀླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།།
ཁྱེད་རྟ་གཅིག་གི་མི་གཅིག་ཁྱོད་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
ཡུལ་མེད་པའི་ཐང་དུ་ཁྱེད་ག་ན་ཡོངས།
ཁྱེད་འགྲོ་བ་དེ་ནི་གང་དུ་འགོ་ཆེན།
ཁྱེད་ཡོང་བ་དེ་ནི་གང་ནས་ཡོངས།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་མ་ཤེས་པ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར སླངོས།།
ཨ་ག་ཁམ་པ་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
ཡོང་ནི་ང་གླིང་མཁར་སྟོད་ནས་ཡོངས།
འགྲོ་བ་དེ་ནི་རྒྱ་ནག་ཁྲི་སྐོར་གསུམ་དུ་འགྲོ །

1445
གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་རི་ཕུག་འབྲིས་ཡོད།
རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཞུ་ཡིག་ཅིག་འཁུར་ཡོད།
འགྲོ་བའི་འགྲོ་ལམ་ཞིགང་ལ་མ་ཐོབ་པས།
ཐང་སྟོང་པ་འདི་རུ་ལུས་དེ་འདུགས།
ཁ་ལ་ཟ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ་ཡོད། །
ལུས་ལ་གོན་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ་ཡོད།
ང་ལོག་སྟེ་ཆ་ན་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་བཀའ་སྐྱོན་ཡོང།
ཉིད་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་མཁན་ཞིག་མེན་ན།
ངས་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ལོན་ཅིག་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་
འདི་ལྟར།།
ཁྱེད་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁྲ་ཐུང་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
ཁྱེད་སྔོནལ་གླིང་གི་ཁག་འཁར་ཅི་ལ་བཅོས།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མའི་ཁག་དེ་ཅི་ལ་བཅོས།
ཁྱེད་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་འདུག་ཟ་ན་རང་སྟོད་བཏང་མཁན་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཀེ་སར་ནས་ཁ་མང་པོ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ། ད་ཁྱོད་རང་ལོག་
སྡེ་སོང་ཟེར་ནས། ཁྲའི་ཐང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་བཏངས། ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་
སོང་བའི་ཞག་བདུན་སོང་བ་དང། རི་ཆེན་པོ་བྲག་ཆེན་པོ། དེ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བར་ལ་

146
མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་ས་ཁྱད་ཅིག་ལ་བསླེབ་པ། ལཔ་མ་ཤེས་པས། ཞག་ཁ་
ཤས་འཁོར་ནའང་ལམ་མ་ཐོབ། དེ་ནས་རི་ལུང་ཆུད་པའི་ཕུག་ཅོལ་དང།
རྒྱུ་མཚོ་ཆུད་པའི་བུང་པ་གཉིས་ཀ་འཕངས་བཏངས་པས། རི་དང་མཚོ་ཚང་མ་
མེད་མཁན་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་འཐད་ཀྱིན་ཞིག་སོང་བ། ཡང་ཞག་གསུམ་
སོང་བ་དང། བྱེ་མ་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་ས་ཁྱད་ཅིག་ལ་བསླེབ་པ། དེ་རུ་རྡ་མི་
གཉིས་ཀ་འགྲུལ་མ་ཐུབ། ནག་མང་པོ་མཐོང་བས། དེ་ལ་ཡང་བྱེ་མ་ཆུད་པའི་
རྐྱལ་ལུ་འཕངས་པ། བྱེ་མ་མེད་མཁན་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཞག་ག་མ་
འགྲུལ་ནས། ཤིག་མང་པོ འི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་པས། དེ་ཤིག་ཚང་མ་ལ་རྒྱུས་
པ་མེད་ཚུག། ཤིག་ཚང་མས་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ཤ་ཚང་མ་ཟོས་ཏེ་བཀགས་པོ་བཅོས་
པས། དེ་ཤིག་ཚང་མ་ལ་རྒྱས་པ་བཙུག་སྟེ་བཏངས་པ། ཀེ་སར་དེ་ནས་ཡང་
ཐར་སོང། ཡང་ཞག་གསུམ་འགྲུལ་དེན། སྦྱར་པ་དམར་པོ་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་
མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་པས། དི་སྦྱར་པ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཁྲག་མེད་ཚུག། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དེ་
ཚང་མ་ལ་ཁྲག་བཏངས་པ། གནོད་པ་མ་སྐྱལ་བ་ཐར། ཡང་ཞག་གསུམ་
འགྲུལ་ཏེ་སོང་བས། དེ་ཞུག་ལ་མཚན་སོང་ནས་གནམ་མ་ལངས་པར། ཞོག་
བཅུ་མུན་འཁོར་ཡོང་གིན་ཞིག་འདུགས་པ། མི་ལ་ཟན་མ་ཐོབ། རྡོ་ལ་རྩ་མ་ཐོབ།
དེ་ཟུག་ནག་མང་པོ་མཐོང་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་ནས་ངུ་ཞིན་ཞིག་ཨ་ནི་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་
ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར །
ངའི་ཨ་ནེས་འང་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
བཀར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོས་འང་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་ལ་ཉི་མ་མ་མཐོང་བ་ཞག་བཅུ་སོང།

147
རྡ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཉི་འོད་མ་མཐོང་བ་ཞག་བཅུ་སོང།
ཨ་ནེ་རང་གིས་ང་ལ་རོགས་ཤིག་མཛོད་ལེ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ངའི་ཚ་བོས་འང་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
ཉི་གཟེར་ཟླ་གཟེར་སྐར་འོད་གསུམ།
འདི་རིང་མ་ཕན་ན་ཅི་བ་ཡིན།
ཨ་ནེ་བཀར་དམན་མོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་
ལ་བསམ་བློ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཉི་གཟེར་ཟླ་གཟེར་སྐར་འོད་ཚང་ཀ་ཕིངས་པ། ཉི་མ་ཤར།
ཟླ་བ་ཤར་ཏེ། འོད་ཅན་སོང་བ་སང་ཀེ་སར་མང་པོ་འཐད་སོང། མཚན་ལ་
ལམ་ནོར་མཁན་གྱི་རྗེས་པོ་མཐོང་སྟེ་ཡམ་མཚན་སོང།།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཞག་གསུམ་འགྲུལ་ཏེ། སྲིན་པོ་ལམ་སྲུངས་པ་མང་པོ་
ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་སྲིན་པོའི་བློ་ལ་སྔོན་ལ་ལག་པ་བཀོག་མཁན་ནི་སྲིན་པོ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
དེ་སྲིན་པོ་ལ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཟེརས། ལྷ་སྲིན་པོ་ང་ཕུད་བཏང་ན། ཁྱེད་རང་གི་
ལག་པ་ངས་བཙོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། སྲིན་པོས། ངའི་ལག་པ་བཅོ་ན་ཕུད་བཏང་
ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གྱིས་སྲིན་པོའི་ལག་པ་ཕིང་སྟེ་བཅོས་པ། སྲིན་
པོ་འཐད་ནས། ལམ་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་བསྟན་ཏེ་བཏངས། ཡང་ཞག་གསུམ་སོང་བ་དང་
སྲིན་མོའི་ལམ་པ་དང་ཐུག། དེ་རུ་ཡང་སྔོན་ལ་འགྲམ་པ་བཀོག་མཁན་ནི་སྲིན་
མོ་ཡོད་ཚུག་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཡང་དེ་སྲིན་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཝ་སྲིན་མོ། ང་ཕུད་
བཏང་ན། ཁྱེ་རང་གི་འགྲམ་བ་ངས་བཙོ་ཡིན་ཟེར་པ། སྲིན་མོས་ཟེརས །

148
ངའི་འགྲམ་བ་བཙོན། ཁྱེད་ཕུད་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་སྲིན་
མོ འི་འགྲམ་བ་བཙུགས་པས། ཀེ་སར་ཕུད་བཏངས།།
ཡང་ཞག་གསུམ་སོང་བ་དང་། གངས་ཀྱི་ལ་མཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་ལ་
བསླེབ་པས། དེ་ལ་དར་གྱི་ཐལ་བ་གཡོག་གིན་ཞིག་མཛགས་པ། མ་བཀགས་
པོ་སོང་སྟེ་མ་ཐར། དེ་གུངས་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་སོང་བ། མི་དམྱལ་བ་ཅན་ལྕང་མཁན་
གསུམ་དང་ཐུག། དེ་མི་ཀུན་ལ་གསེར་རེ་བཏངས་པ་ཁོང་གིས་ལམ་བསྟན་ཏེ་
འཁྱེརས། དི་ཟུག་གིས་སོང་པ་སང། གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་སྐྱོད་ཅེས་ཚོར་ཏི།
རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོས་རྡོ་དང་མི་མང་པོ་བསུ་སྟེ་བཀལ་དེ་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་
པོ འི་མཁར་དེ་མཚོའི་དཀྱིལ་དུ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་རིམ་པ་བཞིན་དུ་ཀེ་སར་
རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་པས། རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཟུར་མོ་དེ ། རྒྱལ་
ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་བསླེབ་མ་ཐག་ཏུ་ཕན་སོང་།
No. 9,
དེ་ནས་ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྐབས་སུ་འདི་ཟུག་བསམ།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ལམ་མ་ཐོབ་པར་ཤི་ཡིན། མཁར་ནང་དུ་ང་རང་ཆེན།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ཡིངས་བཏང་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་སོང་
སྟེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཝ་ཇོ་ཇོ། ཁྱོད་རང་འདི་མཁར་ནང་དུ་མ་
འདག] མཁར་དེ་ང་ལ་ཐོབ་ཆེན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་ཟ་རེས་ཤིག་དང་རེ་བོ་ནག་
པོ་ཞིག་བཏང་སྟེ། ཡུལ་གྱི་མཇུག་ལ་ཕིངས་བས། དེ་རུ་རི་བོ་ནག་པོ་སྤྱབ་
སྟེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འདགས། ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་མཁར་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ་རྒྱལ་པོ་བཅོ་སྟེ་
འདུགས། ཧི་པི་གསུམ་རྩིག་སྟེ་གནས། རྡ་ལ་འོབ་ཆེན་གསུམ་བཏགས།

[49
ཁྱི་ལ་བ་དམར་གསུམ་བཏགས། མི་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཧ་ཀུམ་དྲག་པོ་བཏང་གིན་
ཞིག་འདགས། རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱོ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་མཁར་ལ་ཞག ཉི་ཤུ་ཟམ་
ལུས། རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་བུ་མོ་གཡུའི་དཀོན་མཆོག་མོ་ཟེར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡོད་
ཚུག། དེ་བུ་མོས་ང་གེ་སར་དང་མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་ཟེར དེ་དབང་བཅོས་པས། ཞག་
ཅིག་ལ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ང་ཆེན་ཟེར་ཏེ། རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་དགོངས་པ་ཞུས། ཀེ་སར་
ཆེན་ཟེརས་པ། བུ་མོ་གཡུའི་དཀོན་མཆོག་མོ་ཡང་ཀེ་སར་དང་མཉམ་པ་ཆེན་
ཟེར་ཏེ་སོང། དེ་དང་མཉམ་པོ་ནོར་བུ་ཚང་མ་འབྲང་སེ་སོང། དེ་ནས་དྲག་
རིགས་ཚང་མ་དང་ཡུལ་པ་ཚང་མ་འདུས་ཏེ་གྲབས་བཅོས་པས། ཀེ་སར་དང་
མཉམ་པོ་ ཇོ་ ཇོ་དང་ནུར་བུ་ཚང་མ་སོང། ཀེ་སར་ཆ་མ་བཅུག་པ། འབུ་ཁང་
དུ་བཏང་སྟེ་ཤི་བཅུག་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། བློན་པོ་དེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་རྡས་ཏེ་སོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ།
ལྔ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀེ་སར་ཉེ་རང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱོད་འདུག། ང་ཞའི་འགཁང་པོ་མ་
མཐོང་བ་མ་ཡིན་ན། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་མི་ཚང་མས་འདྲི་ན། འདུ་ཁང་མཐོང་ང་མ་
མཐོང་ཟེར་ཡིན་ཞུས་པ། ཀེ་སར་ནས་བསམ། འབུ་ཁང་བོ་གཟུག་ཅིག་
འདུག་ལྟེན་བསམ་སྟེ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་སོང། དེ་ནས་རྒྱ་ནག་གི་སྐུ་དྲག་ཚང་མས་འབུ་
ཁང་གི་སྒོ་ཕྱེ་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་ལ་ལྟ་བཅུགས་པ། ཀེ་སར་ནས་མགོ་ཐུར་ལ་བཏང་
སྟེ་ལྷས་པ་སང། མི་ཚང་མས་ཀེ་སར་ཕངས་བཏངས། དེ་འདུ་ཁང་ནང་དུ་འབུ་
དཀར་ལྡུམ་བུ། འབུ་ནག་ལྡུམ་བུ། འབུ་གསེར་ལྡུམ་བུ་གསུམ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས།
ཀེ་སར་དེའི་ནང་དུ་བསླེབ་པ། འབུ་དཀར་ལྡུམ་བུ་བསད་དེ་སྟན་ལ་བཏིངས།
འབུ་ནག ལྡུམ་བུ་བསད་དེ་སྙས་ལ་བཅུགས། འབུ་གསེར་ལྡུམ་བུ་བསད་དེ་
གོས་ལ་གོནས། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་ནས་ས་དོང་ནང་ནས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་སླངས།།

150
འབུ་དཀར་ལྡམ་བུ་བསད་དེ་སྟན་ལ་བཅུགས་ཡོད།
འབུ་དཀར་ལྡམ་བུ་བ་སང་དྲོན་མོ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་མེད་ལོ །
འབུ་ཤ་མཚོགས་ས་ཞིམ་པོ་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་མི་འདུག།
འབུ་ནག་ལྡུམ་བུ་བསད་དེ་སྙས་ལ་བཙུགས་ཏེ་ཡོད།
འབུ་ནག་ལྡུམ་བུ་སང་དྲོན་མོ་མིའི་ཡུལ་ལ་མེད།
འབུ་ཤ་མཆོགས་སེ་བྲོད་ཅན་མི་ཡུལ་འཁོར་ནང་མེད་ལོ།
འབུ་གསེར་ལྡམ་བུ་བསད་དེ་གོས་ལ་གོན་ཡོད།
འབུ་གསེར་ལྡུམ་བུ་བ་སང་དྲོན་མོ མི་ཡུལ་ལ་མེད།
འབུ་ཤ་མཚོགས་སེ་ཞིམ་པོ་མི་ཡུལ་འཁོར་ནང་མེད་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་སྐྱིད་པོ་ཞིག་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཡང་མེད་ལ།།
ཀེ་སར་ནས་དེ་ཟུག་ཀླུ་བཏངས་པ། མི་ཚང་མ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟེ་
ཟེརས་བ། ཀེ་སར་མ་ཤི་བ། ཀླུ་བཏང་ཛིན་ཞིག་རག། ད་ཁོ་ག་ཟུག་ལ་
བསད་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་གྲབས་བཅོས། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་ལ་དོང་གི་ནང་དུ་རྡོ་བ་རུབ་
ལ་བཏང་རྗེས་ལ་ཁ་བཅམས་པས། ཨ་ནེ་བཀར་དམར་མོ་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཅེས་
ཚོར་ཏེ། ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཟེརས་བ། ལྷ་བསམ་མེད་ཀྱི་ཀི་སར། འདི་རིང་ཁྱེ་
རང་རྡོ་རུབ་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་བསད་ཅེན། ཁྱེ་རང་གསེར་སྒྲུང་ཞིག་ལ་རྫ་སྟེ། རྡོ་ག
གཅིག་བཏང་བ། ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བིང། གཉིས་བཏང་བ། ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བིང།
དྲི་ཟུག་བཙོ་འིན་ཞིག་ཡི་སྟ་རུ་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོང་ཟེར་ཏེ་བསླབས་པ། དེ་ནས་རྒྱ་ནག་
པའི་མི་མང་བོ་འདུ་སྟེ། རྡོ་བ་མང་པོ་རྒྱབ་སྟེ་ས་དོང་པོ་གང་སོང། ཀི་སར་
གྱིས་ཨ་ནེཀུར་དམན་མོས་ཟེར་མཁན་ནང་ལྟར་བཙོ་སྟེ་ཁ་དོག་ལ་བིང་ཐུབ་པས

151
མི་སུ་ལ་ཡང་མཐོང་མ་བཅུག་པར། ཀེ་སར་གོང་གི་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ།
ངན་ཆོས་བཅོ་སྡེ་རྒྱ་ནག་པའི་ཡུལ་ལ་མཛེ་ནད་ཕོག་སྟེ་བཀགས་པོ་སོང་།།
To, 4.
དེ་ནས་རྒྱ་ནག་པས་ཡང་མོ་པ་བརྒྱ་བསྡུ་སྟེ་མོ་རྒྱབས། རྩིས་པ་བརྒྱ་
ཁྱོངས་ཏེ་རྩིས་སྐོརས་པ། རྒྱལ་པོ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་སྐྱོན་འདུག། ཁོ་ལ་བག་ཕྲིས་
བཅོ་སྡེ་མེན་པ། ཟུར་མོ་ཕན་ཅེས་མི་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། མི་ཚང་མ་ཡམ་མཚན་
སོང་སྟེ་ཀེ་སར་རྡོ་བ་རུབལ་བཏང་སྟེ་ཤི་ཅེས་ཡོད་ཟེར་པ། མོ་བ་རྩིས་པ་
ཚང་མས་ཀེ་སར་གྲང་གི་ལུང་པའི་ཕུ་རུ་འདུག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་རྒྱལ་པོ་དང་
སྐུ་དྲག་ཚང་མ་ལྷ་ལ་སོང། ཀེ་སར་དེ་རུ་མཚམས་ལ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས། ཁོང་
གིས་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཞུས་པ། ཀི་སར་ལེ། ཉེ་རང་ལ་ནར་བུ་ཅི་དགོས་མཁན་ཚང་
མ་བཏང་ཡིན། རྒྱལ་མོ་གཡུའི་དཀོན་མཆོག་མོ་ཉེ་རང་ལ་ཕུལ་ཡིན་ཞུས་པ།
དེ་ནས་རྒྱལ་པོ་གེ་སར་ཡང་མཚམས་ནང་ནས་བིང་སྟེ། རྒྱ་ནག་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱོད པ།
མཇོ་ནད་ཚང་མ་ཕན་སོང་། ཞག་བཅུ་ཟམ་འདུག་སྟེ་ན། གེ་སར་གྱིས་ཆེན་
ཟེར་དེ་ནར་བུ་རེ་དང་རྒྱལ་མོ་གཡུའི་དཀོན་མཆོག་མོ་ཁྲིད་དེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱོད།
གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཞག་གཅིག་གིས་མབསླེབ་པ། ལུག་ནག་པོ་བཅོ་སྟེ་སྙན་ནག་
པོ་ཞིག་བསྟད་དེ། ཁམ་བ་ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ་མི་ལ་མི་ཤེས་ཅེས་བཅོས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་
གཡུའི་དཀོན་མཆོག་མོ་དང་ནུར་བུ་ཅི་ཡོད་མཁན་ཚང་མ་ཅན་དྲའི་ནང་དུ་ཁར་དེ་
སློང་མོ་པ་བ་སྡེ་སོང། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་ཡུལ་གྱི་མཇུག་ལ་བསླེབ་པ། རེ་བོ་
ནག་པོ་ཞིག་གི་ནང་དུ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཀེ་སར་མཁར་ལ་ལྟ་ལ་
སོང་པ། ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་རྡོ་ལ་འོབ་ཆེན་གསུམ་བཏབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག།

16
ཁྱི་ལ་ཁྲོག་དམར་གསུམ། ཁོ་རང་ལ་ཏི་པི་གསུམ་གོན་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཀེ་སར་
ནས་གྲུབ་པ་བཅོ་སྟེ། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། ལྔ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ། རྒྱལ་པོ་ཚང་
མས་ཏིཔི་གཅིག་མེན་ན་གོན་ན་མི་འདུག། ཉེ་རང་གིས་ཏི་པི་གསུམ་གོན་ཅེས་
དེ་ཅི་ཡིན། རྡོ་ལ་འོབ་ཆེན་གསུམ་བདག་ཅེས་དེ་ཅི་ཡིན། ཁྱི་ལ་བློག་དམར་
གསུམ་བཏག་ཅེས་དེ་ཅི་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་ཇེརས་པ།།
དི་པ་གཅིག་ནི་ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཤི་བའི་རྟགས་ཡིན།
གཅིག་ནི་གླིང་མཁར་ང་རང་ལ་ཐོབ་པའི་རྟགས་ཡིན།
གཅིག་ནི་ང་རང་ལ་ཐོབ་འོས་པའི་ཧི་པ་ཡིན།
རྡ་ལ་འོབ་ཆེན་གཅིག་ནི་ཀེ་སར་ཤི་བའི་རྟགས་ཡིན།
གཅིག་ནི་གླིང་མཁར་ང་རང་ལ་ཐོབ་པའི་རྟགས་ཡིན།
གཅིག་ནི་རྟ་ཁོ་རང་ལ་ཐོབ་འོས་པ་ཡིན།
ཁྱི་ལ་ཀློག་དམར་གཅིག་ནི་ཀེ་སར་ཤི་བའི་རྟགས་ཡིན
གཅིག་ནི་ང་རང་ལ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ཐོབ་པའི་རྟགས་ཡིན།
གཅིག་ནི་ཁྱི་ཁོ་རང་ལ་ཐོབ་འོས་པ་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། 
ཀེ་སར་ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོངས་ནས། ཡུལ་མཇུག་
ལ་འབྲུ་གུ་ཡོད་ས་རུ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཕོ་ཞིག་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོ ས་ཕེ་ཞིག་
བཏང་སྟེ་ན་ཁ་བར་འདྲིས་པ། མི་མེ་གྲབ་པ་ལེ། ཉེ་རང་ག་ནས་ཡོངས་པ་ཡིན།
མེ་མེ་གྲུབ་པ་དེས་ཟེརས་པ། ང་རྒྱ་ནག་ཡུལ་ནས་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་
འབྲུག་མས་འདྲིས་པ། མེ་མེ་ལེ། ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཟེར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡོད་བ།
དེ་དང་མ་ཐུག་ག། གྲུབ་པ་དེས་ཟེརས་པ། གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཟེར་མཁན་

158
ཞིག་རྒྱ་ནག་ཡུལ་ལ་ཤི་སོང། རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་པོས་ཟན་དང་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་བཏངས།
བླ་མ་ཆེན་པོ་ཀུན་ལ་སྡོང་ཚར་རེ་ཕུལས། བླ་མ་ཆུང་བ་ཀུན་ལ་བརྒྱ་ཚར་རེ་
ཕུལས། གྲུབ་བ་ང་རང་ལ་ཡང་ལུག་ནག་གཅིག་དང་སྟན་གཅིག་བཏངས་
ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་མང་པོ་ངུ་སྡེ་མུན་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཀི་སར་ནས་
ཇོ་ ཇོ་ངུ་རེས་དང་མུན་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དངོས་བསྟན་ཏེ་ཀེ་སར་ང་
ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་མང་པོ་འཐད། ཀེ་སར་ལ་སྤྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་དེ་
ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་རྡབ་དེད་བཏང་སྟེ་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་མདུང་རྒྱབ་སྟེ་བསད་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་
སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ། རྒྱལ་མོ་གཡུའི་དཀོན་མཆོག་མོ་ཚང་མ་
མཁར་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་སྐྱིད་པོ་བཅོ་སྟེ་འདུགས། གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ཡང་མང་
པོ་འཐད་སོང་།།

KESAR'S JOURNEY TO CHINA AND MARRIAGE
TO GYUI DKON MCHOGMO.
ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS.
After seven kingdoms bad been subdued by Kesar, he went to the
hermitage near the white, black and red hill. He went there, because
he conld not find the road to China, and because he thought he would
be able to show his (m gic ) power to the King of China, after having
been in the hermitage for three years. Underneath the hermitage he
had placed the goat Ka lk, and when 2) years had elapsed , he showed
his magic power to the King of China. In consequence of this, the
King of Chiua's castle ont to pieces on one side, and the King him
self began to suffer from eart-ache. The lot-casters and astrologera
who were consulted, kuert onge that the misfortune had been caused
by Kesar. " Kosar must come here himself, there is no other means of
curing the King ! ” thus they said.
Tlie Chinese were afraid to send a man to Kesar, because he might
be killed. Therefore they sent the bird IDorte with a letter. Al
though the Chinese promised to present Kenar with everything he
should like to possess, he refused to go, until they would ask him
through a human messenger,
Then the King of China cut his hand and mixed its blood with
gomo earth. He formed a man and made him alive by putting in
breath and sent him to Kenar. There this new creature throw the
letter before Kosar and disappeared.
Because Kesar's time of sitting in the hermitage had not yet
elapsed, he sent Aga Khrai mgo Khrai thung meanwhile. The Agu did
not know the way, and when a dark fog came, he lingered somewhere
on the road.
After the three years were fulfilled, Kesar killed the goat Kabulu
and gave her flesh to the birds of prey. Then he went to father
b& Tanpa and mother sNgonmo and asked them to give him the following
things : A basket which will hold the valleys and bills ; a leather
bag which will hold the deserts ; a pot which holds the waters of the
rivers; a bundle of sinews from lice ; the blood of red beetles ; one bushel

155
of gold-dust; the red cheek of the ogress Rorremo; the hand of the Ogre
Ragsha ; a handful of sunbeams, a handful of moonbeams, and one
bushel of ashes of (burat] silk.
Father Thonpa Auswered that he could give him all the articles
required, with th exception of the cheek of tho ogress and
the hand of the og To get these, it would be necessary to go to the
cold valley and ask he hermit abont them . The hermit could not
give them either, lent his copper (coloured ) dogs. Whilst these
dogs were away seating for the ogreb, Kesar and the hermit made *
pit with a window. st when they had finished, the dogs came back,
driving the ogros tore them . Keber shot his arrows out of the
window and out off t cheek and the hand of the two ogres who fled
away. Then Kosar arted for China.
2.
After three days Kegar arrived at a high bill, and thare he found
Aga Khrui thung. He took the shape of a traveller and asked the Agu
how he had got there. The Agu answered that he was a messenger
of King Kesar on his way to China, and that he had lost the way and
was near starving. Kesar blamed him for having undertaken whint
he was unable to perform , and for having been conceited. Then he
sent him back to the land of gIring.
After having travelled for seven more days, he arrived before s
high hill and & rock, with a lake between. Although he went about
for several days, lie could 1100 find the way. Then he threw off tlie
basket which held the valleys and hills, and the pot which held the sea
and the hills, and the waters disappeared.
After another three days they (Kesar and his horse) came to a
sandy desert, where neither man nor horse could go, and both ex
perienced much misery. This obstacle was removed by the bag which
held the deserte.
Again after three days they came to a country with a host of lico
whiob had no sinewg. After they und eaten all the flesh of Kegar, he
gave them some ginews, and then be escaped.
After three more days they came to mady beetles which were
withoat blood. When Kesar gave them some. blood, he could pass
experiencing any barm .
without 
Then, after three days, it became perfectly dark for ten days; there
was a dark fog , the mau waa without food, and the horse without grass,
Kosar cried and complained to Ane blur dmarmo, that for ten day, he
had not seen the sun. Ane bkur dmanmo reminded him of his handfuls

156
of sunbeams and moonbeams. He took them ont, and the sun as well
As the moon rose. When he saw the tracks of the road where he liad
strayed about during night, he felt astonished.
Having travelled for another three days, they discovered that the
road was barred by ogres. Kesar saw the ogre hoge land he had
robbed. He promised to restore the hand, if the gre would let him
pass. The ogro was pleased to receive his ha back, and showed
Kesar the way. In a sirailar way Kesar had a fr passage through the
land of the ogresses, three days later, when he re red the cheek totbe
Oyress who had none.
After three days they arrived ou a glncier-p... , where icy dust was
Renttered over then . They had great difficultie and were obliged to
go back. Then they met three poor men. Kesal ave them some gold,
and they allowed him the way.
When the King of China, who lived in & castle in the middle of a
lake, heard that Kosar was approaching, he sent many of his mon to
meet him . A , Kesar was gradually drawing near, the King of China's
pain became leşg.
3.
Aga Khrni thung, when coming back to the land of g Ling sent
'n Bruguera out of the castle and gave her a black tent. He limself
became king and tyrannized over the country. He wore three hats,
piled one on the other, his horse had three atirrups, and his dog three
red collars.
The King of China had a daughter called yYui dlon mchogmo.
This girl wished by all means to ran away with Kesar and asked leave
of her father. When both weut, all the riches followed after them .
The nobility did not like this, and to bring Kesar back , they pur
saed him and asked him how he could go away withoat having seen the
pit of the dragons. Kesar went back, and when he was looking into the
pit, the Chinese noblemen pushed him in . There were three dragong
of white, black and yellow colour. Kesar killed them . The white ono
he used as a carpet, the black one as a pillow , and the yellow one as a
dress. He ate their flesh, sang a song and was happy.
Then the Chinose tried to kill Kesar with stones, but Ane bkur
dmanmo advised him to take the shape of a golden fly and escape. He
did that and escaped, although the Chinese filled the pit with stones.
Kesar went to the cold valley and practised sorcery, in consequeuce of
which all China was smitten with leprosy.
The 
Tibetan word for silk and ice is the 
same (dar.) According to the
Tibetan text it looks almost as it Kesar himself war scattering the dust about.

157
The Chinese found ont, with tlie help of their magicians, that Kesar
was the source of the illness and that he was sitting in the cold valley.
They sent an enbaasy to himn and offered him all their treasures and the
queen yYui alkon mchognio. Therefore Kesar left the liermitage and
went to China. This stopped the leprosy ; but he did not stay for
longer than ten days and returned to the gLing land together witha
many treasures and y Yui Iku mchogmo.
One dwy before arriving at yling he made a black sheep, pat on
black carpet, took the disguise of a vagabond and pat the queen and all
his treasures in his pockot. He found 'a Bruguma in a black tent and
Agu Khrai thung on the throne with his three hats, etc. He asked him
what was the meaning of his three hats, three stirrups and three
collars for the dog. Khrai thuong said thnt always the first of the three
articles vas a sign tlint Kesar had died ; the second a sign that tho
castlo of gliny had come into tlie Agu's possession ; and the third was
for ordinary use,
Kesnr went back to a'Bruum in his disguise; and u'Bruguma who
took him for a travelling monk from China, asked liim if he could not
give her some news of Kcear. He answered that Kesar had died in
China, and that the King of China on the occasion of his death had
given presents to the lamas: 1000 (Ry ?) to the great monka, 100 (Rs.? )
to the ttle monks, and a black sheep and a carpet to him . ( 'Brutyuma
cried and fainte . Now Kesar showel bin true self to the lady. Then
Le pursued Ayu Khrni thunu ant killed liim with a spear. Kesar went
with his two wives to the gliny castle and lived there in happiness.
Also the Agus were greatly pleased .

NOTES.
In my first brief sketch of Keser's journey to China (rGya Nag),
in Mémoires de la Société Finno-Oagrienne, No. XV, 2, p. II, III, I
made the remark that this episode of the Kenar Saga was probably a
winter moth. Looking at the version as contained in the preceding
pages, I cannot help believing that there are a great namber of passages
in the Saga wbich allow themselves of being explained 48 parables
of the winter. If a pumber of passages cannot be explained with the
help of the Beasons, all the same, we must not forget that the Kesar
Saga, as we have it now, is not the original Kesar Saga, as it was
shaped by the ancient men of gLing ; but that we possess it in the
form into which it has grown in the course of many centuries, nay,
thousands of years. I wish to draw attention to the following passages,
which according to my view speak in favor of a winter myth , forming
the basis of the Saga :—
(a ) The baskets and bags which hold the waters and hills
(probably heaps of snow and ice and the molting snow ).
People might have explained in this way the disap
pearance of ice and snow at the approach of the spring
god
(b) The bloodleas beetles and the lice without sinews might be
the snowflakes and hail-stones. They are changed into
ordinary beetles and lice by Kegar in spring (he gives
them blood and siuewg). The appleasant perception of
the extreme cold in winter reminded the men of yling
of the sting of lice during summer,
(c) The rod cheek of the ogress which is stolon may be ex
plained in this way : The ogress is the personification
of a mountain, the top of which glows like red fire ili
the rage of the sun during summer. During winter the
morning and evening sun may never touch it, and thus
the red clieek is stolen. But as the giants are chased
easier still to take them for
about, it would perhaps be 
personifications of clouds.
(1 ) Kesar's crooked way to China (rGya nag = the black
Extrut) may have been suggested by the spirul-like

159
downward course of the sun during winter. That the
ornament is probably an illustration of
Kesar'a route, is suggested by the Ladukhi name of the
Ornament, rgya srang, which is understood to mean
Chinese street,' not broad street ' or Indian street,'
which are other possible translations.
(e) The fact that Kegar han uot seen the sun for ten days
occurs here in many places during winter. There are
many valleys, to the bottom of which the rays of the
sau do not attain at all for even a longer period.
It is also remarkable that the whole of China is smitten
with leprosy, wlich illness is removed by Kesar's ad
vance towards China. This may point to spow.
The story of Kesar's marriage to y Yui dkon mchogno, shows in par.
ticnlar the close relationship between Kesar and Srong btsan agampo.
Tbat Kesar's two wives are representatives of the two colours, wbito
and blue (or green ), as is also the case with Srong btsan sgampo's wives,
is shown in the first case by the name yYui dion mchogmo, which means
" the turquoise goddess.' She stands for the blue and green colours.
'aBruguma stands for the white colonr as is blown by gling glu of
Phyang, No. IV. It may be added that the Mongolian version of
Korar's journey to China has not much in common with the Lower
Ladakhi version.

VOCABULARY AND COMMENTS.
1.
se kabulri, perlaps more correctly khabulu [nnimals) with
a black and white mouth.
phyed 'ang yayis, one and half ; Low is the 'ang to
be explained in these cases ?
minba, = ma yinpar, besides ; unless.
Lyamo ldorre, name of a bird.
591 mul=dngul, silver.
955 *INI 'adangscas, recover.
rucne, knead.
GINT 
muun 'akhor, mist ; dark fog.
district.
lungs, = lung, valley ; cultivated 
aica 
phug tsel, basked.
399151 
yesungpo, river.
Itsenyspo, = 
2587 
yscr phe, gold dast (literally gold floor).
Tonemo, name of an ogress ; is said to mean 'corpse
cater.'
the Indian
ragsha, name of an ogro ; this is probably 
Tag !
vya chin , offering, gift to birds; tle original form is liya
sbyind. It means that Kusar gave the flosl of tlic goat to birds of prey.

161
In Memoires de la Société Fiano.Ougrienne, No. XV, 2, p. 66, I said
that Laws of Sound No. 1. (see Sketch of Ladakhi Grammar, J.A.S .B .,
Vol. LXX, Part I, Extra No. 2, p . 5 ) ought to bave been given in full,
in this form : 8 + c = gb, 6 + = zh , 6 + te = , A + dz = z. It must be added
that the s may always be replaced by r or l, even by the prefixen by, d ,
if they are pronounced as r or 8. Starting with bya sbyin = bya sin
bya zhin , which illustrates the formula s + j = zh, I shall now give thone
examples, illustrative of the rule, which bave occurred to me during the
edition of the Kesar Saga :--
(or l, r, etc.,) + j = zh.
ljoge becomes zhogs or yshoge ; 'ajogpa has bzhag as its perfect
stem , and 'ajugpa - zhugs ; in both cases the b prefix of the perfect stom
seems to have caused the change of to zh (althongh it is no more
written in zhugs). Here also sbyin = sjin = zhin, sbyar= sjur = zhar and
similar cases must be mentioned.
(or l, r, etc.,) + ts = 8.
rtsogpo becomes sogpo ; 'rtsab bzang becomes sab beany ; the classical
words yyid sad and nyams sad have their ancient prototypes in the
Lower Ladakhi forms ynyid (b ) tsad and nyams (6) tsad. Thus tho of
sad is the result of the work of # prefix on ts.
a (or l, r, etc.,) + dz= z.
rizing becomes zing ; skyer rdzong becomes ker zong ; rdzama
becomes zama ; in mgo zugcas instead of mgo 'adzugcas we may buepect
the influence of a prefix on the original dz, which in this case did not
become te, as a secondary form has it. There are several parallel canes
to this.
Ho ! 'agram mthsal, red cheek.
yabs thonpa, is often spelled yals stonpa ; probably
the concluding s of the first syllable was pronounced with the second,
and instead of the impossible sthonpa, stonpa was written .
khabar, news; it is the Urdu khabar.
2 1 khampa = khamspa, man of Kuams ; is nacd for every
traveller, even a vagabond .
21

182
bkā skyon = bka bkyon , rebuke.
K ' OC ) thru thung instead of Khra thung; this may be a case of
assimilation to the last syllable.
nag, misery, great atrain ; nag mthongba, to soffer much.
skyalbu = skyelou, cause (barm ).
Ena rjespo, track.
khrola - khrodla, among, in the crowd.
lampa, guard (of a road); sentinel.
Fara @551 rimpa bahindu , here in the sense of " by and by.'
3.
rebo = regur, teut of yak'e hair. This kind of tent showa
that this version of the Saga may belong to a tribe in the east of
Ladakl, because the Ladakhis do not make use of such tenta.
Nas i spubças, to put up [a tent) ; literally turn over '; per.
haps because the tent has to be turned about in many directions before
the work is finished ,
gal tibi, hat.
rtsagcas, to pile up ; probably cansative of 'adzegpa, to
climb.
bohen = yob chen, stirrap.
TETT5851 khrog dmar, red collar ; khrog seems to mean 'throat'
origipally ,
hukum , order, commandment; it is the Urdu hukm .
gongspa zhucas, ask for leave.
Wyni dkon mchogmo, turquoise goddess ;
name of the King of China's daughter.

163
rduste, prosecuting ; probably the same as bdaste, clasing.
591 sku drag, nobility,
pasi Idumbu, occurs in the names of the three dragong ('abx )
As well as in that of an Agu ; what it means in this connection I have
not yet found out.
snyas, engas, = pillow .
554 bradcan, savoury .
0551 candra, pocket.
nangdı, in, inside ; this form is used here in many places,
where the colloquial has nangna ; simply to imitate the classical, or,
more correctly, the Central Tibetan langoage.
| grubpa , fulfiller (of tho law ]; title of monks.
51281 menne =mannas, besides,
36561 zan tang, 'perhnps more correctly can btang, a meal in
honour of a dead person.
thsar = theer, once, one torn ; slong thsar re menne: he
gave 1000 (Rg.] cach turn to each (of the lamas).
muncas, to faint.
rtab ded, prosecution on horseback . This compound
makes it probable that the perfect tense of 'acledpa, prosecute, had a b
prefix originally.

No. 1.
༄༅།། དེ་ནས་ལོ་གཅིག་གཉིས་སོང་སྟེ་ན། ཀེ་སར་གང་གི་ལུང་
པའི་ནང་དུ་མཚམས་ལ་བཞུགས། ལོ་གཅིག་སོང་སྟེ་ན། ཨ་ནི་བཀུར་དམན་
རྒྱལ་མོ་མཚམས་ཁང་གི་སྒོ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། གླུ་འདི་ལྟར ། །
འོ་ན་ཨ་ནེ་བའི་ཚ་བོས་ཨ་ནེའི་དངས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོས་ཨ་ནེའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
ད་ལོའི་ལོ་ལ་ཚ་བོ་མཚམས་ལ་འདུག་པ་མི་ཉན་ལོ།
འདིའི་ལོ་ལ་གེ་སར་མཚམས་ལ་འདུག་པ་མི་ཉན་ལོ།
ད་ལོ་བདད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་མེ་ལ་ཡོད་ལོ། །
ཁྱབ་པ་ལག་རིངས་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་མེ་ལ་ཡོད།
ཚ་བོ་ཉེ་རི་ལོ་ཁམས་ཆུ་ཁམས་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ལྷའི་བུ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་ཆུ་ཁམས་རིག་ཡིན།
མེ་ལ་ཆུ་ཞིག་བླུག་ན་ཤི་མེས་ཤིག་ཡིན་ལ།
མེ་སྒྲ་ཆུ་ཡིས་བསད་པ་ཉན་རེས་ཤིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ནང་མོ་བདུད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་ཆུ་ལ་ཡོད་ལོ།
རྙིང་མ་ལོ་ལ་བདུད་ཀྱི་ལ་ཁམས་ཆུ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཚ་བོ་ཉེ་རི་ལོ་ཁམས་མེ་ལ་ཡོད་ལོ།
ལྷའི་བུ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་མི་ཁམས་ལ་ཡིན།

165
ད་ལོ་བདད་མ་བཏུལ་ན་བཅོ་ཐབས་རིག་མེད་ལོ །
ད་ལོ་བདུད་མ་ཤི་ན་ནང་མོ་ཚ་བོ་ཉེ་རང་ཤི་ཡིན་ལོ །
ཚ་བོ་མཚམས་ལ་མ་ཞུགས་བདུད་བཏུལ་བ་ལ་བིང་སྡེ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུབ་ཟེརས་པ་སང་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བསམ། ང་མཚམས་ལ་འདག་
ཅེས་ལ་ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་མ་འཐད་པ་ཡིན་ནོག། ང་མི་ཆ་བསམ་སྟེ་མཚམས་
ཁང་ནས་མ་བིང་བ་འདུགས་པས། ཞག་བདུན་སོང་སྟེ། ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་
མོ་ཡང་མཚམས་སྒོ་རུ་ཡོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།།
ལླ་ཨ་ནེ་སི་ཚ་བོ་བསམ་མེད་ཁྱོད་ཨ་ནེའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཝ་ལྷའི་བུ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བཀུར་དམན་མོ འི་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་མཚམས་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ་གླིང་གི་མགོ་རི་ཞིག་མི་ལྡན་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་མཚམས་བཅད་བཏངས་སྡེ་གླིང་བཞི་གྲུ་བརྒྱད་གཟུག་ལ་ནོན་ཡིན།
ད་ལོ་བདུད་མ་བསད་ན་ནང་མོ་ཁྱོ་རང་ཤི་རྗེས་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱོ་རང་མཚམས་ལ་མ་འདུག་བིང་སྟེ་རིག་ཡོང་ལོ།
ཨ་ནེས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་ཁ་སྐྱེས་པ་སང། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཨ་ནེ་བདེན་
བསམ་སྟེ། མཚམས་ཁང་ནས་བིང་སྟེ་གླིང་མཁར་དུ་སྐྱོད། དེར་སྐྱོད་དེ་ཇོ་
ཇོ་འབྲུ་བག་མ་ལ་དེ་ཚང་མའི་གནས་ཚུལ་ཞིབ་ཆ་བཤད་དེ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་གླུ་
ཞིག་སླངས་སོ།
ངའི་ཇོ་ཇོ ས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་གསན་དང།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།

1G}
ད་ལོ་ང་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་དགོས་བྱུང་ལོ།
བདད་ཁྱུ་བ་ལག་རིངས་བཏུལ་བ་ཞིག་ཆེན་ལོ །
ད་ལོ་བདུད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་མེ་ཁམས་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རི་ལོ་ཁམས་ནི་ཆུ་ཁམས་ལ་ཡོད་ལོ།
མེ་ལ་ཆུ་ཞིག་བླུག་པ་ཞིག་ཆེན་ལོ །
མེ་ལ་ཆུ་ཞིག་བཏང་ན་ཤི་མེས་རིག་ཡིན།
ནང་མོ་བདུད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་ཆུ་ཁམས་ཡིན་ལོ།
པའི་ལོ་ཁམས་མེ་ཁམས་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ནང་མོ་བདུད་ཀྱིས་མེ་ལ་ཆུ་ཞིག་བླུག་ཡིན་འགྲོ །
ད་ལོ་བདུད་མ་བསད་ན་ནང་མོ་བདུད་ཀྱིས་ང་བསད་ཡིན།
སྒྲ་དང་སྒྲ་ཆུང་སྒོ་དེ་རུ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྡེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོ འི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ །
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོ འི་བསངས་ཤུག་རིག་བདག་ལོ།
ཅུ་རུ་བཟང་པོའི་སྐྱེད་དེ་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ ། །
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྨྱུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤག་རིག་བདག་ལོ །

167
མུ་ཏིག་བཟང་པོའི་མགོ་ཐུར་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྐོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ནི་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
གསེར་རང་བརྡུངས་ཀྱི་འོབ་ཆེན་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྡེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྱག་ལོ།
མ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྱག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
པད་མ་ཅན་དོ་སྒོམ་སྒོ་དེ་རུ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་དེ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
བརྒྱ་དང་བརྒྱད་བཅུ་བཏངས་པའི་ཞུར་ལེ་དེ་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ །
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྨྱུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྨྱུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
དངུལ་རང་བཅོས་པའི་ཁ་སྲབས་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་མིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་སྤྲུག་ལོ།

188
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
མག་མལ་ལི་དབུ་ཞྭ་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
གོས་ཆེན་དེར་ཡུག་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་སྤྲུག་ལོ །
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ །
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
བདཀའི་སྐྱེ་རབས་སྒོ་ལ་ཕང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྦུག་རིག་ངོ་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ །
འབན་དུམ་ཙ་དར་སྒོ་ལ་ཡིང་ལོ། །
སྒོ་ལི་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྨྱུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྨྱུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།།

169
དུང་ཡོ་བ་པི་ཅག་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ །
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསང་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ །
མཁལ་བཟོ་མ་ཀ་ག་སྒོ་དེ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ །
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྨྱུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདག །
རྡོ་བ་ཆོད་མ་རལ་གྲི་སྒོ་དེ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྨྱུག་རིག་ཏོང །
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
བ།ནམ་འཁྱེད་མ་ཕ་ལི་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་སྤྲུག་ལོ །
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་རུ་སྨྱུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
ཧི་ཤི་ལི་ཅ་མག་སྒོ་དེ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་དེ་ེལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
22

170
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
བོར་གར་རི་སྨན་རྩས་སྒོ་དེ་ལ་པིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་དེ་ལ་པིང་སྡེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤྲུག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
རོང་ཡུལ་ལི་ཧུ་ལག་སྒོ་དེ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་དེ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྲུག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་༌ཆུ་སྦྲག་རིག་དོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོས་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
མི་ཁར་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་ལག་སྡུག་སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་ལོ།
སྒོ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་རིག་སྤྱག་ལོ།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ན་ཆུ་སྤག་རིག་གདོང་ལོ།
ཙན་དན་དམར་པོའི་བསངས་ཤུག་བདུག་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་ར་ལ་ཕིངས་པ། ཞག་བདུན་ལ་མེན་
ནེ་པིང་མ་ཚར། དེ་ཚང་མ་ཕིང་ཚར་ར་དང༌། ས་རྡོ་བ་རི་རབས་ཚང་མ་འགལ་
ས་མཐོང་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་ཚེར་ཀ་མང་པོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
ལྷའི་བུ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།

171
གནམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཉི་ཟླ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
གངས་སྡོང་མཐོན་པོ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
སེང་གེ་གཡུ་རྩལ་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
བྲག་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
སྐྱིན་ཆེན་བ་རྒན་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
སྤང་སྟོད་མཐོན་པ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཁམ་པའི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
མཚོམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཉ་མོ་གསེར་མིག་གི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལ།
ཐང་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ལྟུང་ཀུ་མཇུག་རྡུམ་གྱི་བློ་བཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལ །
ལུང་པ་ཆེན་མོ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ལྔ་མོ་འབྱོལ་ལི་ཡི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཚུལ་ཤིང་ནགས་ཚལ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
བྱ་དང་བྱིའུ་ཡི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མའི་བློ་གཏོག་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །

172
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དག་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན །
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་གྱི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ ་ཡིན་ལོ །
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱུང་དེ་རུ་རྡོ ་ན།
རྒོད་མ་ཚ་ལངས་ཀྱི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡི་
མཇོ་ཕོ་རྐང་དཀར་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན །
མཇོ་མོ་རུ་ཡོན་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན །
རྒྱུ་བོང་ཁ་དཀར་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
བོང་མོ་ཁམ་པའི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྩིད་བུ་སྐྱེ་དམར་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ར་མ་དཀར་མོའི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཕོ་ལགས་མགོ་གསེར་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
མ་མོ་ཁམ་པའི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱི་ཕོ་གསེར་ལིང་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཁྱི་མོ་ལྟོམ་དཀར་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལ།
བི་ལ་ནག་ཆུང་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
བི་མོ་ཁྲི་སུག་གི་བློ་གཏད་སུ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།

173
ཇོ་ཇོས་དེ་ཟུག་ཞུ་ས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ལན་ད་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏུངས་སོ།
ངའི་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཁྱོད་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཇོ༌ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མས་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་།
གནམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
སྤྲིན་དོ་གོམ་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས།
ཉི་ ཟླ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་དེ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
གངས་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
གངས་མེ་ལོང་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས
སེང་གེ་གཡུ་རལ་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་དེ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
བྲག་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
བྲག་པར་པུར་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས།
སྐྱིན་ཆེན་བ་རྒན་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་དེ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ ། །
སྤང་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
སྤང་ཏོ་གོམ་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ།
འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཁམ་པའི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ཀུན་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
མཚམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཆུ་མིག་ཀྱལ་ཀྱིལ་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས
ཉ་མོ་གསེར་མིག་གི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ཀན་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།

17
ཐང་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཐང་བུ་ཀར་ཀྱིར་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས།
ཤང་ཀུ་མཇུག་རྡུམ་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ཀུན་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ལུང་པ་ཆེན་མོ་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ལུང་པ་སྣ་ཁང་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ །
ཝ་ཙེ་འབྱོལ་མོའི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ཀུན་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྩྭ་ཤིང་ནགས་ཚལ་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཚོར་མ་པར་པུར་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞག་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ །
བྱ་ཤོག་ཐོག་གི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ཀུན་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ཐེ་ཕོང་ཟམ་བཞུགས་ལོ།
ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མའི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
ཐུ་རུ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཐུརུ་ཀིར་ཟེ་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས།
རྒོད་མ་ཚ་ལངས་ཀྱི་བློ་གཏད་བོ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
མཛོ་ཕོ་རྐང་དཀར་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
མཇོ་ཕྲུག་ར་མ་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས།
མཛོ་མོ་རུ་ཡོན་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །

176
རྒྱ་བོང་ཁ་དཀར་ཀུན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཀུ་རུག་བི་ལ་ཟམ་ཞིག་ཞགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ།
བོང་མོ་ཁམ་པའི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་དེ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྩིད་བུ་སྐྱེ་དམར་ཀན་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་རུ་སྐྱོད་ན།
རི་ག་ཁ་སྔོན་དེ་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ།
ར་མ་དཀར་མོའི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཕོ་ལགས་མགོ་གསེར་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ལུག་ག་དྲོ་མོ་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ །
མ་མོ་ཁམ་པའི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ལ་ཡིན་ལ།
ཁྱི་ཕོ་གསེར་ལིང་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
ཁྱི་གུ་ཁྲི་ཆུང་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ།
ཁྱི་མོ་ལྕོམ་དཀར་མོའི་བློ་གཏད་དེ་ཁོ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
བི་ལ་ནག་ཆུང་མ་བཞུགས་བྱང་དེ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ན།
གཡའ་ནང་གི་ལ་དིར་ར་ཞུགས་ཉིད་ལ་བཞུགས་ལོ།
བི་མོ་ཁྲི་སུག་གི་བློ་གཏད་ཁོ་ལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་གྱི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་གྱི་བློ་གཏད་དེ་ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་ཡིན་ལོ
No. 2.
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་རྟ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ལ་སྒ་བསྟད་དེ། ཀེ་སར་ནང་ལ་
སོང སྟེ། དྲི་དོན་བཏངས། ཕོག་དོན་བཏངས། ལྷ་གསོལ་བཏང་སྟེ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་

178
འབྲུ་ག་མ་ལ་ཀལ་ཅོར་བཀལ་ཏེ། གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་སྒོ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྡེ་ནས། ཡམ་
ཚམ་སོང་སྟེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ངུས། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་སླངས།།
མ་ཤམས་འང་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ་མ་ཤུམས་འང།
ཇོ་ཇོ་འི་སྤྱན་མིག་ལགས་མོ་ལ་གནོད་ནས་ཡིན།
མ་ཤུམས་འབྲུག་མོ་མ་ཤུམས་འང།
འབྲུག་མོའི་ཤ་མདོག་ལགས་མོ་ལ་གནོད་ཅས་ཡིན།
ང་སྨང་ར་ཁར་ཁོར་ནང་སོང་སྟེ་སྐྲ་དཀར་ཐར་ཐོར་ནང་བསླེབ་ཡིན།
སྐྲ་དཀར་ཐར་ཐོར་ནང་སོང་སྟེ་སྒྲ་ར་སྒྲ་རེ་ནང་བསླེབ་ཡིན།
ས་ར་སྐུ་རེ་ནང་སོང་སྟེ་དགུ་སྐོར་ནོན་ཏེ་ང་བསླེབ་ཡིན།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་མ་ཤུམས་འང་ལ་འབྲུག་མོ་མ་ཤུམས་ལེ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་ཐེབ་མང་པོ་ངུས་སོང་། དེ་ཟུག་བཙོ་ཡིན་
ཞིག་དང་། ཞག་བདུན་སོང་བས། ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོས་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཟེརས།
ཝ་ཤེས་ཅན་ནི་ཤེས་མེད། ལྷའི་བུ་ཀེ་སར། ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་བུ་མོའི་གཏམ་ལ་
གཟུག་ལ་བདུད་བཏུལ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཐ་རུ་
ཉན་ཏེ། 
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པའི་ཁ་ཞོན་ཏེ་སོང་། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཡང་རྒོད་མ་ཚ་ལངས་ལ་སྒྲ་
བསྟད་དེ། ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ཉིང་རང་ནས་བྲང་སྟེ་སོང། ཡང་ལམ་གསུམ་འཛོམ་
ཅིག་ལ་ཀེ་སར་ཐུག་སོང། དེ་རུ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
ངའི་ཇོ་ཇོས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་ལོ 
ཇོ་ 

177
ཨ་ཡི་རི་དཀར་པོ་སུའི་སྲུང་རི་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ།
དེ་བོ་བཤད་ན་ ཇོ་ཇོ་འགྲོ་བ་ལ་ཐག་ཆོད་སོང་ལོ།
ཨ་ཡི་རི་དམར་པོ་དེ་སུའི་སྲུང་རི་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ 1
དེ་བོ་བཤད་ན་ཇོ་ཇོ་འགྲོ་བ་ལ་ཐག་ཆོད་སོང་ལོ།
ཨ་ཡི་རི་ནག་པོ་དེ་སུའི་སྲུང་རི་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
དེ་བོ་བཤད་ན་ཇོ་ཇོ་འགྲོ་བ་ལ་ཐག་ཆོད་སོང་ལོ།
ཨ་ཡི་རི་ལྗང་ཁ་དེ་སུའི་སྲུང་རི་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ།
དེ་བོ་བཤད་ན་ཇོ་ཇོ་འགྲོ་བ་ལ་ཐག་ཆོད་སོང་ལོ།
ཨ་ཡི་རི་སྔོན་པོ་དེ་སུའི་སྲུང་རི་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
དེ་བོ་བཤད་ན་ཇོ་ཇོ་འགྲོ་བ་ལ་ཐག་ཆོད་སོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཀུན་མ་བཤད་ན་ཇོ་ཇོ་མི་འཁྱེར་ཐག་ཆོད་ཡིན།
དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་སོ །
ཨ་ཡི་རི་དཀར་པོ་དེ་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་གྱི་སྲུང་རི་ཡིན།
ཨ་མི་རི་དམར་པོ་དེ་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་གྱི་སྲུང་རི་ཡིན །
ཨ་ཡི་རི་ནག་པོ་དེ་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྗོགས་པོའི་སྲུང་རི་ཡིན།
ཨ་ཡི་རི་ལྗང་ཁུ་དེ་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་སྲུང་རི་ཡིན།
ཨ་ཡི་རི་སྔོན་པོ་དེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ང་རང་གི་སྲུང་རི་ཡིན་ལོ 1
23

178
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་མཉམ་པོ་ཆ་ཅེས་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གཉིས་
ཀ་སོང་སྟེ། མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་རུ་ཇོ་ཇོས་འདོན་
དང་ཞིག་བཅོས། ཀེ་སར་གཉིད་ཅིག་ལོག་སྡེ་འདུགས་པ། ཉིད་དི་ནང་དུ་ཨ་
ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོའི་སྐད་ཅིག་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་ཞིག་ཚོར་རོ།
ལྔ་ཤེས་ཅན་ནི་ཤེས་མེད་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཉོན་དང་།
ལྔ་གྲོས་ཅན་ནི་གྲོས་མེད་ལྷའི་བུ་ཀེ་སར་གསན་དང༌།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་བུ་མོ་འཁྲིད་དེ་བདུད་ག་ཟུག་ལ་བཏུལ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འཁྲིད་དེ་བདད་ཡུལ་ལ་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཆེན།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་སློག་པ་མ་ཉན་ན་བདུད་བསད་པ་མི་ཉན་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཐབས་ཤིག་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཏོང་ལོ།
གཉིད་ཀྱི་ནང་དུ་དེ་ཟུག་ཚོར་ཏེ། ཀེ་སར་མགྱོགས་པ་ལངས་ཏེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་
ལ་ཙང་མ་ཟེར་བ། ཉ་ཞིག་ལ་བརྫུསྟེ་མཚོའི་ནང་དུ་སོང། མཚོའི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་བུ་
དྲ་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་བུ་དྲའི་ཁ་སོང་སྡེ་གྲུབ་པ་ཞིག་ལ་བརྫུ་སྟེ་མགོ་
བདུམ་སྟེ་བཞུགས་སོང། ཐོ་ ཇོ་ལ་འདོན་དང་འཐོན་ཏེ་བལྟ་ཟ་ན། ཀེ་སར་མེད་
ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ངུ་འིན་ཞིག་རྡོ་རྗེས་བཅདས། མི་རྗེས་བཅདས་པ་མ་ཤེས་
པས། ཕར་ལྟ་ཚུར་ལྟ་བཅོས་པ། མཚོའི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་གྲུབ་པ་ཞིག་མཐོང་སྟེ།
གསེར་དང་དངུལ་གྱི་མལ་ཊལ་ཞིག་ཕུལ་ཏེ། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་ཅེས་ལ་འཚམས།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནི་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་སྐྱོད་དེ་རྫུམ་འཕྲུལ་ལི་ཁ་ལྷ་མོ་མང་པོ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་སུན་མི་བཅུག་པར་། གླིང་མཁར་དུ་ཁྱེརས། ཀེ་སར་མཚོའི་ནང་ནས་

179
བི་ང་སྟེ། བདུད་ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་ལ་སྐྱོད་པས། ཞག་ཁ་ཅིག་འགྲུལ་དེ་ན། ས་དོག་
མོ་ལུང་པ་གསུམ་འཛོམས་ཤིག་ནས་ཕར་ལ་ས་ཁང་གི་མཐིལ་ན་འགྲུལ་ཅེས་
ཤིག་ཡོད་ཚུག! 
དེ་བོ་མཐོང་སྡེ་སྔང་ང་སྐྱེས་ཏེ། དྭ་རུ་ཞིག་ཕིང་སྡེ་སྦྲུག་གིན་
ཞིག་དང་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།།
ལྷ་འཁོར་གསུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་བཅུ་མཁྱེན་ནོ།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
ཀླུ་འཁོར་གསུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་བཅུ་མཁྱེན་ནོ །
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ་དགུ་མཁྱེན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་དགུ་མཁྱེན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
ཕས་ལྷ་ཀེར་འོང་སྙམ་པོ་མཁྱེན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
མས་ལྷ་བཀར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་མཁྱེན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་མཁྱེན།
འདི་རིང་ངལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།

180
བར་གྱི ཨ་མ་སྐྱབ་བདུན་མཁྱེན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
འོག་གི་ཀླུ་གྱོལ་ལྗོགས་པོ་མཁྱེན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག། མགར་མ་ཞིག་བཏངས་པ། ཁོ་ལ་འོད་རྒྱལ་
བ་ཞིག་མཐོང སྟེ་ལམ་གསལ་པོ་མཐོང་སོང། དེ་ནས་བིང་སྟེ་ཞུག་བདུན་སོང་སྟེ་ན།
བདུད་ཀྱི་ས་སྣཔ་ལ་བསླེབ་ནས། ར རྫི་དང་ཐུག་སོང་། ར་རྫི་སུ་སུ་སྔོན་ལ་
ཧོར་གྱིས་གླིང་པའི་མི་ཟུམ་སྟེ་ཁྱེར་མཁན་ཡོད་ཚུག! སུ་སུ་བདུད་ཀྱི་མི་རེ་
ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོང་གི་མདུན་ལ་གྲུབ་པ་ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ་སོང་བས། དེ་ར་རྫི་ཀན་
གྱིས་ཟེརས་པ། ལྔ་གྲུབ་པ་ཁྱོད་འདིར་ཅི་ལ་ཡོངས། འདིར་བདད་ཡུལ་
ཡིན་ཟེརསཔ། ཟེར་ནའང༌། ཁོ་དེ་རུ་འདུགས། ཁོས་འཕྲལ་བཅོ་སྟེ །
བདད་ ཀྱི་ར་མ་རྒྱུགས་པ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཤ་དང་ཚིལ་ཚང་མ་ཤུར་རིན་ཟ་འིན་ཞིག་
འདགས། དེ་ནས་ར་རྗེ་ཀུནགྱིས་ཟེརས་པ། ཁྱེ་རང་གྲུབ་པའི་ཕ་ཡུལ་ག་ན་
ཡིནཟེརས་ལ།། གྲུབ་པ་དེས་ང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ནས་ཡོངས། ངའི་ཡུལ་ང་ལཡང་
མི་ཤེས་ཟེརས་པ། ར་རྫི་ཀུན་གྱིས་འདྲིས་པ། གླིང་གྱོལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་བདུད་
བཏུལ་བ་ཡོང་ཆེནཟེར་འདུག་པ། ནམ་ཡོང་ཅེས་འདུག། གྲུབ་པ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཁ་
བར་མེད་ད་ཟེརས་པ། གྲུབ་པས་ཟེརས། ཀེ་སར་ཡང་མགྱོགས་པ་ཡོང་རེས་
འདུག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་གླིང་པའི་མི། ར་རྫི་ལ་ཡང་ཡོད་པའི་མི་ཀུན་ལ་ཀེ་སར་
གྱི་དངོས་བསྟན་དེ་ཟེར་པ། ང་གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ཡིན། ང་བདུད་བཏུལ་

181
བ་ལ་ཡོངས་པ་ཡིན། བདད་ཀྱི་མཁར་ནང་དུ་སུ་ཡོད། མཁར་གྱི་ལམ་སྲུངས་ལ་
སུ་ཡོད་འདྲིས་པ། དེ་ནས་གླིང་གི་མི་ཀུན་འཐད་དེ། དེའི་གནས་ཚུལ་ཚང་
མ་ཞུས་པ། བདུད་ཀྱི་མཁར་ནང་དུ་ཇེ་མོ་བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་ཡོད། མཁར་གྱི་
སྒོ་སྲུངས་ལ་སྟག་གཟིག་གི་ལམ་སྲུངས་ཡོད། དེ་ཚང་མ་གསོན་ཏེ་མེན། སོབ་
རྒྱངས་ཏེ་བོར་དེ་ཡིན། ཉེ་རང་མ་འཇིགས་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་འཐད་
ཀྱིན་ཞིག་སོང་སྟེ། མཁར་གྱི་མདུན་ལ་ཙ་བིག་མ་བསླེབ་པ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
མདའ་གང་གནམ་དང་མ་ཐག་པའི་མཁར་དེ་སུའི་ཡིན་ལོ།
མདའ་གང་ས་དང་མ་ཐུག་པའི་ནང་དུ་སུ་ཞིག་ཡོད།
དེ་སྐུ་མཁར་པོའི་ནང་མི་ཆེན་སུ་ཞིག་བཞུགས་ལོ །
ཟ་མཁན་ནི་འདྲེ་ཞིག་ཡོད་དེ་སྲུང་བའི་ལྷ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
ང་ཁ་ལ་ཟས་མེན་པ་ཟླ་དགུ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
ལུས་ལ་གོས་རིག་མེད་པ་ལོ་དག་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
ང་ལ་ཟས་ཤིག་སྩལ་རོགས་རིག་མཛད་ལོ་
ལུས་ལ་འགོན་སྙིང་རེ་སྩལ་བར་མཛད་ལོ།
ཁ་ལ་ཟས་ཤིག་སྩལ་དེ་ན་ང་བསད་ནུའང་གྲིག་ལོ།
ལུས་ལ་གོས་ཤེག་སྩལ་ཏེ་ན་ང་བསད་ནའང་ཆོག་ལོ།།
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང! མཁར་གྱི་ནང་ན་ཇོ་མོ་བམ་ཟླ་
བུམ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱིས་དཀར་ཁང་ནང་ནས་མགོ་ཕིང་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། དེ་རུ་པན་ཇུང་སྲོང་
ཕྲུག་ཅིག་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས། ངོ་མོ་ལ་སྲོ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ཡོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།།

182
ལྔ་ཁྱོད་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་སྲིན་བུ་ཞིག་ག་ནས་ཡོངས་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་མི་ཡུལ་ལ་ལུང་ཕྲུག་དེ་གང་ནས་ཡོངས་ལོ།
ཁྱོད་དི་སྲོག་ལ་ཕངས་པ་ཚོར་ར་མི་རག་ག།
ཁྱོད་རང་སྲོག་འཁར་རེ་རང་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
འདི་བདུད་ཡུལ་ཡིན་བ་མ་ཤེས་ས}
འདི་བདུད་མཁར་ཡིན་བ་མ་ཤེས་ས།
ཁྱེད་ལ་ལུང་ཕེ་ཞིག་དགོས་ན་མཁར་གྱི་སྒོ་ལ་ཡོང།
ཁྱེད་དབང་ཅན་རིག་ཡིན་ན་བཤིག་པ་རིག་ཡོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ལན་དུ །
ཤར་རི་སྒོ་ལ་རྟ་དཀར་ལ་ཞོན་པའི་མི་དཀར་འདག།
དེ་བོ་ལ་ང་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཡོང་ཡིན་ལོ།
ལྷོ འི་སྒོ་ལ་རྟ་སྔོན་ལ་ཞོན་པའི་མི་སྔོན་ཅིག་འདག།
དེ་བོ་ལ་ང་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཡོང་ཡིན་ལོ།
ནུབ་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ལ་རྡོ་ནག་ལ་ཞོན་པའི་མི་ནག་ཅིག་འདུག།
དེ་བོ་ལ་ང་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཡོང་ཡིན་ལོ །
བྱང་གི་སྒོ་ལ་རྡོ་གསེར་ལ་ཞོན་པའི་མི་གསེར་འདུག།
དེ་ལ་ང་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཡོང་ཡིན་ལོ །

183
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཇོ་མོ་བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱིས་ལན་དུ།།
མི་ཡུལ་ལ་སྲིན་བུ་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
མི་ཡུལ་ལི་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
ཤར་གྱི་སྒོ་སྲུངས་དེ་ངའི་མིང་བོ་ཡིན་ལ།
ལྷོ འི་སྒོ་སྲུངས་དེ་ངའི་ཨ་ཞང་ཡིནལོ།
ནུབ་ཀྱི་སྒོ་སྲུངས་དེ་ངའི་ཨ་བ་ཡིན་ལོ།
བྱང་གི་སྒོ་སྲུངས་དེ་ངའི་བུ་ཚ་ཡིན་ལོ །.
དི་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་གནོད་པ་མི་སྐྱལ་ལོ།
དེ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ངས་ཟེར་ཡིན་ལོ །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་མཁར་གྱི་སྒོ་མདུན་ལ་སོང་བ། རྟ་སྒོ་སྲན་
ཏེ་བཅུག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གྱིས་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་སོ།།
ཁྱེད་བདད་ཀྱི་ཇོ་ ངོས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཇོ་མོ་བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
དཀར་ཞིག་རང་དཀར་ན་ཇོ་ ཇོ འི་སོ་དང་སེན་མོ་དཀར་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་གི་ཇོ་ཇོ་བོར་ཏེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཉེ་རི་མིང་འདྲི་སྟེ་ཡོངས་ཡིན།
དཀར་ཞིག་རང་དཀར་ན་འབྲུ་གུ་མའི་སོ་དང་སེན་མོ་ཀུན་དཀར་ལོ།
དེ་ཐུག་གི་འབྲུ་ག་མ་བོར་ཏེ་ཇོ་མོ འི་མིང་འདྲི་སྟེ་ཡོངས་ཡིན།

194
ནག་ཅིག་རང་ནག་ན་ཇོ་ ཇོའི་སྐྲ་དང་མིག་སྨྲ་ནག་ལོ ། །
ནག་ཅིག་རང་ནག་ན་འབྲུ་གུ་མའི་སྐྲ་དང་མིག་སྨྲ་ནག་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་གི་ཇོ་ཇོ་བོར་དེ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཉེ་རང་གི་ཕི་ལ་ཡོངས་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་གི་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་འཕང་སྡེ་ཇོ་མོ་བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་བཙལ་ཏེ་ཡོངས་པིན།
ང་མཁར་གྱི་ནང་དུ་ཡོང་ཆུག་ག་མཛད་ཇོ་ཇོ་མཁྱེན་ལོ།
ང་ལ་རྡ་སྒོ་ཕྱེ་རོགས་རིག་མཛད་འང་ཇོ་མོ་མཁྱེན་ནོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཇོ་མོ་མང་པོ་འཐད་སྒོ་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་མཁར་གྱི་ནང་
དུ་སོང་སྟེ། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་སྐྱིད་པོ འི་ནང་དུ་གནས་སོང།།
No. 3.
དེ་ནས་ཞག་ཅོ་ལྔ་ཟམ་སོང་སྟེ་ན། ནམ་མཁའི་འབྲུག་སྒྲ་ལྟར་སྐད་
ཆེན་པོ་འབོད་ནས། ས་དང་གནམ་ཚང་མ་ཆིག་ཆིག་གལ་ཅེས་ཡོངས་པས།
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཇོ་མོ་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། ཇོ་མོ་ལེ། འདི་སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་དི་ཅི་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ།
ཇེ་མོས་ཟེརས། འོ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལེ། ད་བདད་ཁྱབ་པ་ལག་རིངས་ཡོང་ཅེས་ལ་ཁ་
གྱུར་དེ་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཞག་བཅུ་སོང་སྟེ་ན། ཡང་སྔོན་མའི་
སང་ཐེབ་སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་བཏངས། ཡང་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་འདྲིས་པ། ད་འདི་
སྐད་དེ་ཅི་ཡིན་ཛེ་མོ་ལེ། ཇོ་མོས་ཟེརས། ད་ཞག་བཅོ་ལྔའི་ལམ་ལ་བསླེབ་
སྡེ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཐེབ་སྐད་དྲག་པོ་ ཞིག་བཏངས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་
ཡང་འདྲིས། ངོ་མོ་ལེ་ད་ཅི་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་མོས་ཟེརས། ད་བདུད་ཞག་

185
ལྔའི་ལམ་ལ་བསླེབ་ཚར་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་མང་པོ་འཇིགས་ཏེ་ཟེརས། ད་ང་
སྦྱོས་ཇོ་མོ་ལེ་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་མོས་སྦྲ་བའི་ས་ཁྱད་ཅིག་མེད ། ས་དོང་ཅིག་
འབྲུ་སྟེ། དེའི་ནང་དུ་འདུག་ན་ཉན་ཡིན། ང་ཏོང་ལ་མི་ག་ནས་ཁྱོད་ཡིན།
ཀི་སར་གྱིས ཟེརས་པ། མི་ང་རང་གིས་ཁྱོང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། རྐང་པའི་མི་ཅུ་བཅུ།
ལག་པའི་མི་ཅུ་བཅུ་འཕུད་དེ། མི་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཁོ་རང་དང་བཅུ་གཅིག། ཇོ་མོ་དང་
བཅུ་གཉིས་བཙོ་སྡེ། མཁར་གྱི་ནང་ས་དོང་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་འབྲུ་སྟེ། དེའི་ནང་དུ་
སྟན་སྙས་བོལ་མོ་བཅོ་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་དེའི་ནང་དུ་བོ ། ཟླ་བ་གཅིག་གི་ཟ་
ཅིས་ཞིམ་པོ་ཞིག་ཡང་མཉམ་པོ་བོརས། མགོ འི བྱ་རིགས་ཚང་མའི་ཤོག་
པ་སྣ་སོགས་བཏངས་། ས་དོང་ལ་ཐོག་སྤྱབ་སྟེ། དེའི་ཁ་ས་མོ་ཆེ་ངདངོས།
དེའི་ཁ་ལུད་མོ་ཆེ་བཏངས། དེའི་ཁ་སྐྱིད་མོ་ཆེ་བསུ ། དེའི་ཁ་ཟངས་མོ་ཆེ་
བཀལ་ཏེ། ཆུ་སྐང་སྟེ། དེའི་ཡོག་ལ་མེ་ཆེན་ ཞིག་ཕུ་སྟེ་བོརས། དེའི་
ནང་དུ་བདུད་ལ་ཟ ཅེས་བཅོ་སྟེ་བོརས།།
དེ་ནས་བདུད་ཁྱབ་པ་ལག་རིངས་བསླེབ བས། རྗེ་མོས་ཟླ་མེས་
ཚང་མ་བཏང་སྟེ་ན། བདུད་ཀྱིས་ཇོ་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཇོ་མོ་ལེ་མི་དྲི་ཞིག་རག་པ།
ཅི་ཡིན། ཇོ་མོས་ཟེརས་པ། 
རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་མི་དྲི་ཞིག་ག་ནས་ཡོང་ཡིན།
རྡ་རོ་བརྒྱ་དང་མི་རོ་བརྒྱ་དེ་ཉེ་རང་གིས་འཁར་དེའདག། ང་ལ་རྟ་རོ་དང་མི་རོ་
ཞིག་ག་ནས་ཡོད་། བདུད་ཀྱིས་མེན་མེན་ཛེ་མོ། ནང་ནས་ངའི་དཔེ་ཆ་དེ་ཁྱོང།
ངས་མོ་ཞིག་བཏབ་ཡིན། དཔེ་ཆ་དེ་ལ་ཡོག་མ་བཏང་བ། ལག་པ་གཡོན་པ་
ལ་མ་འཁར་བ། ལག་པ་གཡས་པ་ལ་འཁར་དེ་ཁྱོང་ཆེརས་པ། ཇོ་མོ་ནང་
མ་སོང་སྟེ། དཔེ་ཆ་རྐང་པའི་ཡོག་ལ་བཏངས་ཏེ། ལག་པ། གཡོན་བ་ལ་
2

188
འཁར་དེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་བཏུངས་པ། དེ་ནས་བདད་ཀྱིས་མོ་བཏབས་པ། མོ འི་ནང་
ནས་འདི་ཟུག་བིང། ས་དོང་གི་མཐིལ་ན་གླིང་གེ་སར་ཡོད། མགོའི་ཁ་བྱ་སྣ་
ཚང་གི་ཤོག་པ་ཡོད། དེའི་ཁ་ས་པོ་ཆེ་ཡོད། དེའི་ཁ་ལུད་མོ་ཆེ་ཡོད། དེ་
ཁ་སྐྱིད་མོ་ཆེ་ཡོད། དེའི་ཁ་ཟངས་མོ་ཆེ་བཀལ་ཏེ། ཟ་ཅེས་སྐོལ་གྱིན་
ཡོད་ཟེརས་ཏེ་བིང། དེ་ནས་བདད་ཡམ་ཚན་ཞིག་སོང་སྟེ་ཛེ་མོལ་ཟེརས་པ།
ཇོ་མོ་ལེ། ངའི་མོ་དཔེའི་ནང་ནས་འདི་ཟུག་ཅིག་བིང་སོང། དེ་བདེན་བ་མེན་
འགྲོ་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཚང་མ་མིས་བཏབས་བཏངས་པ། ཇོ་མོས་མེའི་ནང་ནས་ཕིང་
རྫུན་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག། མེས་མཐིལ་ལ་ཐེབ་བཏང་སྟེ། ཉ་རྒྱུན་ཞིག་མེན་བ་ལུས་
མ་བཙུགས། ཡང་བདད་ ་་ས་ཇེ་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་མོ་ལེ་ང་སྲོལ་གཉིད་ཁམ་
པ་ལོག་ག། བྱ་གཉིད་ག ཏུམ་ལོག་འདྲིས་པས། ཇོ་མོས་ཟེརས། རྒྱལ་
པོ་ལ། དག་ས་རང་ད བང་བ་ཡིན་ནོག། སྲོལ་གཉིད་ཁམ་བ་ལོག་ལེ།
བྱ་གཉིད་དམ་དུམ་དེ་བེས་ལ ག་ཆོག། བདུད་ཀྱིས་བདེན་བདེན་ཟེར་ཏེ། སྲོལ་
གཉིད་ཁམ་པ་ལོག་ཡིན་ཟེའུས་ལོགས། དེ་ནས་ཉིད་དི་སྐྱིལ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། དབུགས་
ནང་དུ་འཐེན་ཟ་ན། ས་རྡོ་བ་ཅི་ཡོད་མཁན་ཚང་མ་སྣ་ཁུང་ནང་ལ་འཁྱེར་རད་ཚུགt
དབུགས་ཕི་སྟ་ལ་པིང་ཙ་ན། ཡང་ཚང་མ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ཁྱོང་ངད་ཚུག!l
ཇོ་མོས་གཉིད་ལ་སོང་སྡེ་ཡིན་ནོབག་བསམ་སྟེ། ཐོ་བ་གཡས་རྗེས་མ་
རྗེས་བཏང་སྟེ་ཟངས་པོགས། སྐྱིད་བུ་འཐེན་ཏེ། ས་མོ་ཆེ་ལུད་མོ་ཆེ་བྲུ་སྟེ།
ས་དོང་གི་ནང་ནས། གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས། ཀེ་སར་ལ་བདུད་
མཐོང་སྟེ་འཇིགས་ཏེ་འདར་རོད་ཚུག་པ། ཇོ་མོས་ཀེ་སར་འཇིགས་ཉེས་ཤེས་ཏེ།
ཀེ་མར་རི་ཐུར་རུ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ། བདུད་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་པོའི་ཁ་བིང་སྟེ། གྱེན་ལ་བང་

137
གཅིག་ཐུར་ལ་བང་གཅིག་བཏངས་པ། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་ལ་ཧམ་པ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་
ཡང་ཐུར་རུ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་་་ཁྱེར་པ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་བང་གཅིག་བཏངས་པ། བདུད་ཀྱིས་ཨ་
ཚ་ཚ། ཤིག་གིས་་ ་རག་ཟེར་རིན་འདུགས། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བདུད་ཀྱི་
གོང་རྩ་ནས་ཟུམ་སྟེ་ཟེར་ས་པ། ལྔ་བདུད་ངན། ད་ཁྱོ་རང་ངས་བསད་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ།
རྡུག་པ་ཅན་གྲི་གུ་ལག་ལ་འཁར་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པ། བདུད་ཀྱིས་ཟེརས་པ།
ལྷ་ཁྱོད་སུ་ཡིན། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཟེརས། ང་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་བཞིན་
ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། འོ་ཁོའི་ལག་ལ་ང་ཤི་ཅེས་མེན། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཡང་ཟེརས་པ།
ང་བར་བཙན་གྱི་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་བདུན་ཡིན་ཟེརས། བདུད་ཀྱིས་འོ་ཁོའི་ལག་ལ་
ཡང་ང་མི་ཤི་ཟེརས། ཡང་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས། ང་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྫོགས་པོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས།
འོ་ཁོའི་ལག་ལ་ཡང་མི་ཤི་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གྱིས། ང་གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་
ཀེ་སར་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དུད་ཀྱིས་འོ་ཀེ་སར་ཡིན་ན། ཁྱོ་རང་ཇི་ལག་ལ་ང་ཤི་
ཐག་ཆོད་ཡིན། ངའི་ལོ་ཁམས་མེ་ལ་ཡོད། ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཁམས་ཆུ་ལ་ཡོད།
མེ་ལ་ཆུ་ཞིག་བླུག་ན་ཤི་བ་ཡིན། ང་མ་བསད་ཀེ་སར་མཁྱེན། ང་ཉེ་རང་གི་
གཡོག་པོ་བཅོ་ཡིན། གླིང་ཡུལ་དབུར་ས་བཅོ་བ་མཛད། བདུད་ཡུལ་དགུན་ས་
ཅོས་ལེ། ང་ཉེ་རང་གི་ཁྱི་རྫི་བོ་སྟེ་འདུག་ཡིན་ཀེ་སར་མཁྱེན་ཟེརས་པ།
ཀེ་སར་ལ་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཚོར་ཏེ་ཐེ་ཚོམས་སྐྱེས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་སྐྱོད་
དེ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་བསམ་བ་མེད་མཁན་ནི་ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ། བདུད་མ་བསད་ན།
ཉིད་ལ་གནོད་པ་མེན་བ་ཕན་ཐོགས་མི་ཡོང། རྡུག་པ་ཅན་གྲི་ག་དང་མགྱོགས་
པ་སྙིང་ཤག་དགོས་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བདེན་བསམ་སྟེ། རྟག་པ་
ཅན་གྲི་གུ་པིང་སྟེ་བདུད་ཀྱི་སྙིང་ཁ་ཤགས། དེ་ནས་བདུད་ཤི། རོ་ལ་ཁོག་སྟོད་

188
ཁོག་སྨད་ཕེ་སྟེ། ཁོག་སྟོད་པོ་མེ་ལ་སྲེག་སྟེ་རོམ་ཁང་བཅོ་ ་བོརས། ཁོག་སྨད་
དེ་ས་བྲུ་སྟེ་དེའི་ནང་དུ་བཀབ སྟེ་ལང་གར་ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ་བོར ། ཞག་ཁ་ཅིག་
སོང་སྟེ་སྒོ་སྲུང་མཁན་ནི་སྟག་གཟིག་ཚང་མ་མེ་ལ་བཏུགས དེ་ནས་ཀི་སར་དང་
ཇོ་མོ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཆོ་ལོ་རྩེ་འིན་ཞིག་འདགས། ཇོ་མོ ཀེ་སར་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་
ཆེན་བསམ་སྟེ། རྗེད་ཟན་དང་རྗེད་ཆུ་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག་བོར ས། ཐུ་རུ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་
དབྱེར་པ་ལ་རི་ནས་ཤིང་ཁྱེར་བརྒྱ་ཁྱོང་བཅུགས། ན་ནས་ཐལ་ཁར་བརྒྱ་རེ་
ཕིང་བཙུགས། ་སྟ་ལ་ཆ་ཟ་ན་རྡོག་ཚོང་རེ་བཏང་གིན་ གྲུལས། ནང་ལ་ཆ་
ཟ་ན་མུལ་དྲུག་བཏང་གིན་འགལས། གུ་རུ་རོ་བཀལ་པ། ད་རུང་རྒྱུགས་འདབ་
ཟེརས། དེ་ཟུག་བཙོ་འིན་ཞིག་འདགས་པ། ཀེ་སར་དང་ཇོ་མོ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བར་
ལ་བུ་མོ་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་པས། ཀེ་སར་ལ་གླིང་ཡུལ་རྗེད་དེ་འདུགས།།
， - 、 - --

KESAR 'S VICTORY OVER THE GIANT OF THE NORTH .
ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS.
1.
After two or three years Kesar went to the cold valley to live there
in a hermitage He lud been there for one year only, when the queen
Ane bkur dmunmo arrived there and told him not to sit in the hermitage
any longer, but to go and fight the devil of the north. “ This year," she
anid , “ is a favourable yerr for Kenar, because Kesar's portion will be the
element of water, and the devil's portion the element of fire; nnd water,
will be able to quench the fire.' ” After seron days, Ane bkur almanno
came again to the door of the hermitage, and advised Kesar to go soon.
“ If you do not go, you will not remain in possession of the high
hills of gl'ing: if you go, with what success will you be able to subdue
(pre ) tlic four continenta with their eight corncra ! " Nov Kesar
arose, wient to ' Brnyuma and Anid : " Take the following articles
out of the house, brusk them tlıree times, wash them three
times ir the depth of the sea, and bring an offering of sameinsvood
for eacus of them . The saddle ; the crupper studded with corals ;
the haltar studded with pearls ; the stirrups of pure yold ; the saddle
cloth svith a lotus-pattern ; the cloth to cover the bind part of the
horse for which 1$0 (cows, r'll pecs ?) were paid ; the bridle-bit of
pure silver ; the velvet cap ; the silk suit ; the red girdle-clotlı ;
the beautiful shawl; the knife with a sliell handle ; the talisman sliaped
like kidneys; the sword ' stone-cutter"; the alield 'sky-coverer '; the
steel tinderbox ; the powier-bag of Russian leather; the rifle from Rong ;
the quivor of such weight that eighteen men have to carry it.- ' Bruyama
had to work liard for cight days before she had carried everything out
of doois ; and when she lind finished, there was an earthquake.
It is remarkable that according to the Sheh -verain (Mémoire de la Société
findo ouronno, No. XV-2, p . 3.) Ane bir ilmanmo comce to warn Kesuir not to
go ; And that he goos in spite of lier warnings, trusting in the ellioncy of his reii.
gions merits.
2 In Ladhakl, tile wood of the pencil.cedar is often called mainlal wood .

190
Then 'n Bruum sings a 40118 of sorrow , in whicls sille mentions all
the articles and crentures, who either themselves or the glory of them
will go to the north. She asks who will not the part at comforter for
thone have to gtay behind.
List of the creatures and other articles who either then uselves or whose
glory will yo.
(1) yuam atod mthonpu, the liigli sky.
(2 ) gange stod mtloupo, the high glacier.
(3 ) brag stod mthoupo, the high rock ,
(4) spang stod mthonpo, the high mendows.
(5 ) mthgom stod mthonpo, the high lake.
(6 ) thang stod mthonpo, the high plain .
(7 ) langpa chenmo, the great valley.
(8 ) rtava shing nags thsal, the grass and forests.
(9) rgyal lham Kebar, the godly King Kegar.
(10 ) gling mkhar rtse dgu, the gLing castle with nine torrots.
(11) rkyang rgod dbyerpa, the gennine wild kiang.
(12) mdzo pho rkang dkar, the white-footed male Dzo.
(13) rgya bong kha dkar, the white-mouthed chief ass.
(14) rteidbu skye dmar, the red-necked he-goat.
(15) pho lage mgo yeer, the yellow -headed ram .
(16) khyi pho yaer ling, the yellow hound.
(17) bila pag chung, the little black cat.
List of the creatures and other articles, who will wail on account
of the other's departure.
(1) nyi zla yngie, sun and moon .
(2 ) sengge yyu ralcan, the lioness with the turquoise mane.
(3 ) skyin chon ba rgan, the big ibex, the old ox.
( ) 'abrong chen khampa, the big brown wild yuk,
(5 ) nyamo yaer mig, the female fish golden eye.'
(6 ) shangku mjug rdum , the bushy-tailed wolf.
(7 ) wamo 'ajolli, the vixen clever in hiding.
(8 ) bya dang byia, fowls and little birda.
(9 ) jojo 'aBroguma, lady 'aBraguma.
(11) rgodma thgalanga, the much-coveted mare.
(12) mdzomo royon, the female Dzo with crooked horos.
(13 ) bongmo khampa, the brown she-asg.
(14 ) ramn dkarmo, the white she-goat.

191
(15) mamo khainpa, the brown ewe.
(16 ) khyimo Itom dkar, the bitch with a white belly.
(17) bimo khrasng, the many-coloured sle-cat.
Kesar said in reply to 'a Bruguma's song, that there wonld be little,
ones to be a comfort to the wailing animals. This is a list of them :
( 1) spriu togom zam zhig , & clond of the size of a saddle-cloth.
(2 ) gangs malong zam zhig, ice of the size of a mirror.
(3 ) brag parpur, some little rock .
( 4 ) spang togom zam zhig, a meadow of the size of a saddle
cloth .
(5 ) chu mig kyal kyil, some wells here and there.
( 6 ) thangbu kyar kyir , a little plain,
( 7 ) Juugpa ana klang zam zhig, a valley of the size of nostrils.
(8 ) theerma par pur, a few thords.
(9) ’abu dmår lam bstan tliepong, Agu Red worm , way -leader
thumb.
(10) agu dpalle, Agu d Palle, the ' glorious one.'
(11) thurra kerze zam zhig, a little foal of the size of a lentil.
( 12 ) mdzo phrug raws zam zhig, a Dzo-calf of the size of a goat.
(13) karug bila zam zbig , a little doukey of the size of a cat.
(14) rigu kla engon , the blue-mouthed kid .
(15) lugga dromo, the lamb called heat,'
(16) khyigu khra chung, the little particoloured dog.
(17) latirra, a weasel,
. The song consigts of two parts : the first part comprises Nos. 1-8 of the
Kate , the second part comprises Nos. 9 .17. The principal idea of the first part is,
that in winter probably) the glory of oertain places will come to an end, and that
in consequence of this the creatores living tbere will have a end time. Even sun and
moon are considered as creatares feeding on tbe sky. The principal idea of the
moond part of the song is that all male creatures will leave their female fellow .
creatures (winter is not a suitable time for breeding on the whole), and that for
this roa on the female creatures will be wailing. In the Sheh-Tersion the firet part
only of this song occurs. According to it tbe creatures complain, not because the
places will love their glory, but (which is practically the same) because Keeer will
leeve the place. In the next fasciole it will le interesting to meet with a song,
mooording to which, together with Kyung rgod dbyerpa's return to Ling, the animal
life altogether wakes op again .
. It is not impossible tliet there existed answers only for the second part of
the song (9-17) originally , 9-17 may bave been quite a separate song , and its
principal idea may have been this : when the male animale leave the fonale ones,
The latter have the comfort of new offepring in different stages of development,
Later on, when the first part of the song was united with the second part, it
was considered necesary to invent little once for the different places.

192
'a Bruguma cried, and Kobar told her that he would have to stay
away for 108 ycars: his beard would grow , his hair would turn white,
and big back would become crooked ! Being admonislied once more by
Ane bkur dmanmo, Kesar rode off towards the uorth and met again with
'uBruguma, who had travelled by a different road. He allowed her to
go with him , on the condition that she should guess this riidle : Whose
watchlills are: the white hill, the red bill, the black hitl, the green
hill, and the blge hill ? 'a Bruguma answered at once, that the
white hill was dBangpo rgyabzhin's ; the red hill, Ama Kyabs bdun's;
the black lill, Klu rgyall Jogpo's, the green hill, "Gyallham Kesar's ; and
the blue hill, ber own watchhill. Thus she was allowed to go with
Kesar ; but again Ane bkur dman rgyalmo appeared to him in a dream
and ordered him to sodd a'Bruguma beck ; otherwise he would not be
able to subdue the devil of the north . . Therefore Kesar took the shape
of a fish and bwana to the middle of a lake, where there was a tree.
He then took the shape of a monk, ascended the tree and sat there with
his face wrapped up. 'uBruguma, who could not find her husband
anywliere, decided to go back. She was taken home quickly by Ane
bkur dmanmo and a host of other goddesses.
Kenar came to a place where three valleys meet, and where he had
to go through a tunnel. As he was afraid, be performed on a ritaal
drum and prayed to tlie 360 gods; the 360 wator-spirits; the nine gods
and water-spirits who were born together with him ; the father god
Ker zong sayanpo ; the mother-god ukur dman rgyalmo ; d Bangpo
royabzhin , Ama skyabs bdun ; 411d to King 1Jogpo. Therefore he re
ceived a bright liglat and came safely to the end of the tunnel.
After seven days, he came to the frontier of the devil's realm and
met with the devil's herdanien, some of whom had been carried sway
from g Ling by the devil. He killed some of the fattest goals and sleep,
and ate their meat and grease. The shepherds said, they liad lieard
that King Kesar would come soon to fight the dovil ; could be not give
them some news ? He said that Kogar would certainly come soon, and
showed his real self to the captives from gLing. They were pleased
to see their King and told him , that at present Bambumakyid vas
alone in the castle, and that the tigers and leopards, placed before the
gnten,' were not alive, bat stuffed with straw .
Ariving before the castle, Kesar asked , " Who lives in this castle,
I DOPR this refer to tho ice of the north, which often shows the figures of all
kinds of animale ?

193
which by an arrow 'a length torchog neither earth nor sky ? " . Then
he said that he was a wanderer who for nine mouthie had not
received any food, and no new clothes for nine years. Bamzubumskyid
told bim to come to the gate, where he would receive some foar,
He replied that he was afraid of the watchmon beforo the four gates
of white (engt), blue (south), black (west), and yellow (north) colour.'
Bamsabumskyid said, she would speak to the watchmen, who were her
brother, ancle, father and gon . However, when Kesar went near, the
gates were still locked up. He then sang a song saying, " If there is
anything in the world which deserves to be called white, it is
a Bruguma's teeth and nails ; and if there is anything wlich deserves
to be called black, it is 'uBruguma's hair and eyebrowe. Such
beautiful lady I left in order to make the acquaintance of larly
Banzabuni kyid. I am King Kegar himself." When the Dzemo heard
this, alie was greatly pleased, opened the door, wad both lived in tlie
castle in happiness.
3.
After some time they heard & terrible noise, which was ever
insidasing. It was caused by the der I, who was approaching the
castle. The Dzomo proposed to hide Kesar in a pit, but did not know
how to dig it. Kesar produced ten hand-bones and ten foot-bones,
formed ten men out of them , and they all digged a deep bole in the
ground. When it was completed, Kedar descended into it and
received food, blankets and provisions to keep him alive for a month.
Then a roof was built, and a pot placed on it, in which some food was
cooked for the devil.
The devil arrived, and smelt at once that a man had come. The
Duomo said that such a thing was impossible, and that he was smelling
the corpses of 100 men and horses, which h > who carrying on his
shonidors. He wished to hear what the magic book would tell him ,
And ordered the Dzemo to bring it, not treading on it, carrying it in
her right hand. She did exactly the opposite. Out of the book a
voice was heard, saying that Kenar bad arrived and was sitting in a
pit with a roof of feathers, manure and earth above him , and a kettle
1 This description of the castle is probably borrowed from the description of
the catle ot aan, moon and stars (by rign). Comparo 1940. No III.
This system of colours Wa apparently Baggested by that of the Lokapäin8.
Compare Grügwedel, Mythologie des Baddhismus, 8. 181. For the weat, & wrong
colour is given hero ; instead of 'black ' there ought to be * red.'
S Acoording to the sheh version it is the Dzemo, who produces the workmen tr
dig the pit.
25

194
with boiliog food on the top. The devil thought that all this could
not be possible, and throw the book into the fire. The Dremo, feigning
to take it ont again, pashed it in even further. Then the devil asked
whether he had better sleep lightly or soundly, and the Dzemo
advised him to sleep fast, because he was in his own house. He went
to sleep at once. When taking in the breath, all the stones and earth
round about came flying into his nostrils ; when blowing out his breath,
they were turned out again ,
When the devil was fast asleep, Koger left the pit. Seeing the
devil he trembled from fear, but the Dzemo, to encourage him , rode
about on the devil's body. Then Kesar, mounting r & yang rgod dbyerpa,
rode about on him algo, and the devil complained of the maoy lico,
which were bothering him , as he believed. Now Kesar adyanced to
kill the devil with the poisoned kuife. He pretended to be dBangpo
royabzhin , mother &Kya bs bdun and Wogpo.! The devil did not mind
thom all, and awoke only when he was told that King Kesar had
arrived to kill him . He implored Kesar to spare his life. " I shall be
your servant and will give you my warm land wherein you may live in
winter. Kenar folt iuclined to spare his life, but was admonished to
kill the devit by Ane bkur amaumo. He was then killed with the
poisoned knites and cut into lialves. The apper half w48 placed in an
ordinary grave, the lower half in a Musulinan grave.
Banzabumskyid gave Kesar the food and drink of forgetfal
1099, and both remained in the castle, playing at dice ; Kesar's horse
was treated badly, and had to do hard work. To Kosar and the Dzemo
a little girl was born. Kesar forgot the gLing land entirely.
1 According to the Sheh-version, Komar pretende to be several of the Agus.
% According to the Sueb -version, the aibe lives of the devil have to be killed
separately.

VOCABULARY AND COMMENTE.
1.
adi ciggi lo, or dalo, this year.
ABAHN lo khams, the omens of a year.
khyabpa lagrings, 'coverer, long-hand,' name
of the devil Curulugu. In the original MS. khyaba is written, but
explained to mean khyabpa.
nangmo, next year.
Florer935 955'5H1 mthsame bcad btangcas, the same as
mthsams ycodpa, sit in a hermitage.
zhibcha, = zhibta, accurate, minutely.
gari, = ngarangngi, my.
EN99 | sango shug, offering of pencil-cedar, instead of
mandal-wood.
A mgo thur, halter, respectful term ; the ordinary word
for 'balter' is thur mgo.
5 . I to sgom , or togom , & felt which is placed between the
wooden gaddle and the back of the horse, a saddlecloth.
G ay xhurle, # cloth to cover a horse from the shoulders to
the tail.
kha srabs, srab, bridle (head-harness ) of a horse.
WATER magmal, velvet ; Urda makhmal.

196
55W dar yug, in Ladakh the name of a pilk dress, worn for
instance by the nyopa.
padka, red linoo.
K 
Q95501 'abandum , probably bandum ; said to mean 'beautiful.'
75% Isadar, a shawl, worn over the shoulders when dancing.
a, handle (of a knife ).
El 371 ricag, knife.
TT kagu, amulet; porhaps bkdgu, & ' little word.'
A TH 'akhyedma, comprising.
shili, a good kind of steel,
camag, fro-steel.
1991 
A borgar, or bolgar, or Bulhar, Russian leather.
sman rcas, = sman chas, powder-bag.
er up rang yul, Upper Ladakh ; tho rifles of this district dead
to be famoda.
Di mthsom stod , mtheo stod, the high lake, the contre
of the lako.
amo "abyolli, the vizon who is clover in hiding ';
'adyolli is probably related to 'abyolla.
Idem Idemgyi Idom mkhar, seems to mean
the shaky castle. The stores of gLing are kept in it.
A pholags, a sam .

197
Tom Hom ditar, =ltoba dkarpo, white stomach, white belly.
togom , see to sgom .
ugi nyidla, its very place, instead of.
DATA bya shog thog, birds ' with wings on the top'; name
of all birds.
the phong,= the pho, thumb.
nk a kerze, lontil.
955 , latirra, weasel, the uno as premo.
955 mang ra, a mang skra, Lexicon sma ra, board.
An op khar khor, a little [beard ).
o thar thor, a little ; in this connection: thore w ..l be a
little wbito in my hair.
ara sgure, bent down by age.
skor, the cycle of the twelve years ; dge skı • 9x12= 168
your
os nonte, pressing ; here in the songs of exceeding,' ercooding
108 years
'adontang, perhaps 'adon btang, meal.
51 bz-lra, tree.
thoncas, here inøthe Honse of being rendy' ; when the
food leaves the kettle, it is ready cooked.
ERA UN rjes bcadcas, search by looking after tho tracka.

198
mantal, a circle of offerings.
rdzum 'aphrul, = rdzu 'aphrul, magical illusion.
Nasy snangnga, = myangan (?) ; enangnga skyocas, be sad.
daru, a amall drum , used for expelling demona.
vesok sa saam , frontier.
25INI rgyangecas, to fill; probably a causative form of
khyangcas, be fall,
rogla phangspa thsorcas, be sorry for
losing his own life.
hurre, = 'akhurte, carrying.
Barrapatay bahigpa rig yong, come as a destroyer.
hig chig, a little ; (shaking a little).
PU881 kha gyurcas, turn the moutb, i.e., return.
icu, the bones of the hands, fingers, toes and feet.
van sna sogs,= ma théogs, different.
NAJN ! spubcas, cansative of 'abubapa, put on a roof.
amoche, mach earth ; ludmo che, mach dong, eto.
W9'455JN ) yog btangcas, pat underneath .
arena Taal. srol ynyid khampa, healthy sleep in ordinary
fashion. Instead of wol, the Sheh-version has gro ; srol is probably the
original form . Lad . Grammar, Laws of Sonnd , No. 4 .
1 tam twm , a little (aleep) ; Sheh-version hae tum tum .

199
are besla, = bresla, on the journey.
thoba, skirt [of a garment].
1 Yyak rdzes ma rizes btangcas, to gird
up [a coat).
295N1 pogcas, take off (a pot from the fire).
rdugpacan, poisonoue. That the word, dug, poison,
presupposes a prefix in Lower Ladakh, is rad, probable not only by
this form , but also by the other form tug; tue change of the d tot
presupposes the work of a prefix.
ahiba yin , liøre in the sense cas yin, I am to die.
he thsoms, = the theon , doubt.
shagcas, = bcagcas, cat, break.
anggar, tomb (of Mohamedan Tibetans).
btugcas= bdlugcas, see ante.
rdog chong, kick with the foot.
gatal mul khrug, beut with the fist, box ; the Slieh-version
bas mul thug.

To. 1
དེ་ནས་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་ཧོར་པ་ཧལ་ ལྡེ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ མདུན་ མ་ མེད་ པ།
ཡུལ་ཚང་མ་ལ་མེད་པ། ཡང་ག་ཡུལ་ལ་འདུག་ལྟ་ཅེས་ལ་ཕོ་རོབ་འབྱུང་ཤེས་
གཉིས་ཀ་བཏང་སྟེ། ལོ་མང་པོ་སོང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ས་ཀེ་སར་གླིང་ཡུལ་
ལ་མེད་ཅེས་ཆོར་ཏེ། ཧོར་གྱིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་མ་འཁྱོང་ཅིས་ལ་དམག་འཁྱེར་
ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། གྲབས་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་གྲང་གི་
ལུང་པའི་ནང་དུ་ལིངས་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག། གཡངས་པ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་མེད་ཚུག།
ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་མགོ་ཁའི་ཐང་ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་ནང་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་
གིས་ཏི་པི་གཉིས་གོན་ཏེ། ཁྱི་ལ་ཁྲོག་དམར་གཉིས་བཏོག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ཅི་
ཡིན་ཟེར་ན། ཀེ་སར་འདད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྟོར་དེ་མེད་པ་སང། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་དཔོན་
པོ་ང་རང་ཡིན་བསམ་སྡེ་ཡིན་ནོག། དེ་ནས་ཞག་ཅིག་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ལ་སྙི་
ལམ་ངན་པ་ཁ་རྐྱང་མཐོང་བས། ཨ་བི་མོན་ཁན་མོ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། ཨ་བིའི་མདུན་
ལ་ཇོ་ཇོས་སྙི་ལམ་བཤད་དེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར །

a01
ངའི་ཨ་བིས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
ཨ་བི་མོན་ཁན་མོས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་ཞག་ངན་གྱི་སི་ལམ་པོ་ངན་པ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་མཚན་ངན་གྱི་སྙེ་ལམ་པོ་རྡོག་པོ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་གླིང་སྟོད་ན་ཆུ་ཆེན་ཞིག་བྱུག་པ་རང་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཆུའི་ཆུ་སྣ་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ང་རང་ཁྱེར་བ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཆུའི་ཆུ་དཀྱིལ་ལ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་མཆོངས་པ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཆུའི་ཆུ་ཤུལ་ལ་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་བསླེ པ་མགོང་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་གླིང་སྟོད་ལ་མེ་ཆེན་ཞིག་འབར མཐོང་ལོ།
མེའི་མེ་སྣ་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ང་རོང་འདུགས་པ་མཐོང་ལོ།
མེའི་མེ་དཀྱིལ་ལ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་མཆོངས་པ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
མེའི་མེ་ཤུལ་ལ་ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་བོ་བསླབ་པ་མཐོང་ལོ།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུ་ཤལ་མ་ལ་འགྱུར་བ་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཇོ་ཇོ་ང་རང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཁྱེར་བ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ཧོར་གྱིས་བསད་པ་མཐོང་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་ཤ་སྙིང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟ་ལ་མཐོང་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་མར་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟ་ལ་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཨ་བི་ཉེ་རང་གིས་མོ་ཞིག་ཏོབ་ལོ།
ཨ་བི་མོན་ཁན་པོས་མོ་ཞིག་ཧོབ་ལོ།
ཀུན་ནི་མོ་སྟན་ལ་ཕད་ཅོ་ཡོང་ཆེན་ལོ།
28

20
ངའི་མོ་སྟན་ལ་གོ་ཤེན་དར་ཡུག་བཏང་ཡིན།
ཀུན་ནི་མོ་རྡོ་ལ་རྡོ་དཀར་རྫི་ནག་ཡོང་ཆེན་ལོ །
ངའི་མོ་རྫི་ལ་མུ་ཏིག་དང་གཡུའི་མོ་ཇི་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ།
མོ་བཟང་པོ་བཏབ་ན་རྫུན་པ་ཅི་དགོས་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ།
མོ་ངན་པ་བཏབ་ན་རིན་ཅན་སྲོག་ལ་ཆད་པ་ཡིནལོ།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་བིས་ ་འཝཏབས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ འི་སྙི་ལམ་ཅི་མཐོང་མཁན་ནང་
ལྟར་མོའི་ནང་ནས་བིང་སོང་མི ་། ཨ་བིས་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་ཟིརས། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ། མོའི་
ནང་ན་མ་བཟང་པོ་ཡང་མེད། མ་ངན་པ་ཡང་མི་འདག། འབར་ཚོད་ཅིག་བིང་
འདག་ཟེརས། ཨ་བི་ཁོ་རང་ལ་ཁང་པ་ལ་སོང།
No. 2.
དེ་ནས་ཆུ་འཐུན་མོ་ཆུ་ལ་སོང་བས། ཆུ་འཐུན་མ་ཆུའི་མཐའ་མ་ལ་
བསླེབ་སོང། 
ཆུའི་ཕར་ཁ་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་སྣ་ལ་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་ཟེར་མཁན་དེ་
བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། 
དེ་ནས་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུས་ཆུ་འཐུམ་མ་ལ་གཏམ་ལན་ལ་
གླུ་ཞིག།།
ཆུའི་ཕར་ཁ་རུ་ཡོད་པའི་ཨ་ཆེ་ཆུ་འཐུམ་མས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང
རྒྱམ་མཚོའི་ཕར་ཁ་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ཆུ་འཐུམ་མས་བདག་ལ་གསན
མཁར་བརྩན་པོའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཅེན་ལོ།
མི་དཔའ་བོ འི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེརཆེན་ལོ།
རྡ་མགྱོགས་པའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཆེན་ལོ །

208
ཁྱི་ཚན་དེའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཅེན་ལོ;
ཇོ་ ཇོ་མཛང་ བའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཆེན་ལོ།
ཕས་ལྷའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཅེན་ལོ །
མས་ལྷའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཆེན་ལོ།
རལ་གྲི་རྣོན་པོའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཅེན་ལོ།
མདའ་མགྱོགས་པའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཆེན་ལོ།
མདུང་རིང་མོའི་མང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཉན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཆུ་འཐམ་མས་ཅང་མ་ཟེར་བ། ཆུ་འཁུར་དེ་
མཁར་ལ་སོང་བ། མཁར་ལ་བས་ཆུ་འཁོར་ཏེ། ཇོ་ ཇོས་ཁོ་ལ་ཁ་སྐྱེ་སྟེ་ཟེརས།
ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་ཆུ་འགོར་བཅུགས། གཏམ་གསུམ་ཟེར་མི་བཅུག། གོམ་གསུམ་
བ་མི་བཅུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཆུ་འཐུམ་མས། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ། གོམ་གསུམ་མི་རྒྱབ་ལེ།
གཏམ་གསུམ་ཞུ་བཅུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་གཏམ་གསུམ་ཟེར་ན་ཡང་འགྲིག་
ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཆུ་འཐུམ་མས་ཞུས། ང་ཆུའི་མཐའ་མ་ལ་བསླེབ། དེའི་ཕར་
ཁ་ལ་མི་ཞིག་ཡོང་སྟེ་འདག༔ ཁོས་མཁར་གྱི་མིང་དང་མིའི་མིང་ཚང་མ་འདི་
རུག་པ། དེའི་གཏམ་ལ་ཉན་ཏེ་ཙ་བིག་འགོར་སོང་ཞུས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ངོས་ཆུ་
འཐུམ་མའི་གོས་ཚང་མ་གོན་སྡེ། ཆུ་ཀར་འཁར་དེ་ལྟ་ལ་སོང་བས། དེ་མི་དེ་
རུ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཡང་ཁོས་ཆུ་འཐུམ་མ་ལ་གཏམ་ལན་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏུངས།
ཝ་ཆུའི་མཐའ་མའི་ཆུ་འཐུམ་མས་ཉོན་དང།
གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་ཆུ་འཐུམ་མས་གསན་དང༌།

204
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་མཁར་བརྩན་པོ འི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཅེན །
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་མི་དཔའ་བོའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཅིན
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་རྟ་མགྱོགས་པའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཨིན
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ཁྱི་ཚན་དེའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ན།
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ཇོ་ཇོ་མཛངས་མའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཆེན
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ཕས་ལྷའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཅེན།
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་མཛrལྷའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་ཟེར་ཆེ།།
རལ་གྲི་རྣོན་པོའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཆེན།
མདའ་མགྱོགས་པའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཉེན།
མདུང་རིང་མོའི་མིང་ལ་ཅི་ཟེར་ཆེན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཇོ་ཇོས་ཁོ་ལ་གཏམ་ལན་དུ་ཀླུ་ཞིག།
ཆུའི་ཕར་ཁའི་མི་དེས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
རྒྱམ་ཚོའི་ཕར་ཁའི་མི་ཁྱོད་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
མཁར་བརྩོན་པའི་དོན་དེ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
མི་དཔའ་བོའི་དོན་དེ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་མཛངས་པའི་དོན་ཁེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
རྟ་མགྱོགས་པའི་དོན་དེ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
ཁྱི་ཚན་དེའི་དོན་དེ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
ཕས་ལྷའི་དོན་དེ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
མས་ལྷའི་དོན་དེ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།

206
རལ་གྲི་རྣོན་པོ འི་དོན་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
མདའ་མགྱོགས་པའི་དོན་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས
མདང་རིང་མོ འདོན་དེ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཅི་ཞིག་དགོས།
དེ་རྣམས་ཁྱེད་ལ་དགོས་ན་ངས་བཤད་རྒྱུ་ཡིན
སྔོན་མ་སོ་ཁར་བརྩོན་པའི་མིང་ལ་གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུ་ཟེར་ཆེན་
དག་ས་མཁར་བརྩོན་པའི་མིང་ལ་ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་ཟེར་ཆེན
སྔོན་མ་མི་དཔའ་བོའི་མིང་ལ་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་ཟེར་ཅིན
དག་སའི་མི་དཔའ་བོ 
འི་མིང་ལ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ཟེར་རྟེན།
སྔོན་མ་རྟ་མགྱོགས་པའི་མིང་ལ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ཟེར་ཅིན
དག་ས་རྟ་མགྱོགས་པའི་མིང་ལ་སྔོ་རོག་པོན་པོན་ཟེར་རྟེན
སྔོན་མ་ཁྱི་ཚན་དེའི་མིང་ལ་ཁྱི་ཕོ་གསེར་གླིང་ཟེར་ཆེན
དག་སའི་ཁྱི་ཚན་དེའི་མིང་ལ་ཁྱི་མོ་ལྡོམ་དཀར་མོ་ཟེར་ཅེན
སྔོན་མ་ཇོ་ཇོ་མཛངས་མའི་མིང་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ཟེར་ཆེན
དག་སའི་ཇོ་ཇོ་མཛངས་མའི་མིང་ལ་དཔལ་མའི་ཨ་སྟག་ཟེར་ཆེན
སྔོན་མ་ཕས་ལྷའི་མིང་ལ་ཀེར་ཟོང་སྙན་པོ་ཞུ་ཆེན
དོག་སའི་ཕས་ལྷའི་མིང་ལ་ཕས་ལྷ་རབ་ལྷ་ཞུ་ཅེན
སྔོན་མ་མས་ལྷའི་མིང་ལ་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་ཞུ་ཆེན
དག་སའི་མས་ལྷའི་མིང་ལ་དྲག་ལྷ་རྒྱལ་མོ་ཞུ་ཆེན
སྔོན་མ་རལ་གྲི་རྣོན་པོ 
འི་མིང་ལ་རྡོ་བ་ཚོད་མ་ཟེར་ཅིན།
དག་ས་རལ་གྲི་རྣོན་པོའི་མིང་ལ་མིག་སི་རི་རལ་གྲི་ཟེར་ཅེན

༡06
སྔོན་མ་མདའ་མགྱོགས་པོའི་མིང་ལ་མདའ་མོ་གསེར་མདའ་མཇུག་རིངས
དག་ས་མདའ་མགྱོགས་པའི་མིང་ལ་མདའ་དཀར་པོའི་ལམ་བསྟན
དེ་བླུག་ཟེར་དེ་ནི། ཇོ་ཇོ་མཁར་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོངས། ཧོར་གྱི་ཤན་ཀྲ་
མི་རུ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་རང་ལ་སོང༌།།
དེ་ནས་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་ཀ་ལ་ཧོར་གྱིས་དམག་འཁྱོང་ཅེས་ཆོར་ཏེ
གྲབས་ཤིག་བཅོས་པས། དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མས་རང་གིས་མེ་རེ་ཕུ་སྡེ་ཐུགས་
བཙོ་སྡེ་ཟེརས། ང་དང་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ལ་ལྟ་སྐོར་ལ་མིན། ང་ཏང་སུ་
ཤི་ན། འདིའི་མེ་ཡང་ཤི་ཡིན སུ་གསོན་དེ་ལུས་ན} འདིའི་མེ་ཡང་མ་ཤི་
བ་ལུས་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁོང་ཚང་མ་སོང༌། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་བྲང་དང་
ཉེ་མོ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། ཧོར་གྱི་རྡ་ཚང་མ་རྒྱལ་བ་མཐོང་སྟེ། མཚན་ལ་ཁོང་
རྡོ་རྐུ་བ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཧོར་གྱི་རྟ་ཚང་མ་རྐུས་ཏེ་ཁྱོངས། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་
ཕྲུག་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱི་ལ། དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ལ་མ་ནོན་བ། རྙིང་ན་ཧོར་གྱི་བྲང་ས་
རུ་བསླེབ། རྡ་ཚང་མ་འཁྱེར་ཚར་ཏེ་མེད་ཚུག། དེ་རུ་རྟ་རྐང་གསུམ་གཅིག་
ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོས་བསམ། འདི་བོ་འཁྱེར་ན། ཁུ་བོ་ཞིག་འདུག་བསམ་མིན་
ཞིག་འདུགས་པ། དེ་ཚུག་པ་གནམ་ལངས་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་རིབ་ཤིང་ཞིག་
མགོ་ལ་གོན་དུ་འདུགས་པ། གནམ་ལངས་པ་དང། ཧོར་ཚང་མ་ལ་རྡ་མེད་པས།
ཧི་ལིང་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་བལྟ་སྟེ་འདུགས་པ། སྔོན་ལ་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་
མདན་མ་གར་འདུག་ལྟ་ཅེས་ལ་ཕོ་རོག་འབྱུང་ཤེས་གཉིས་ཀ་དེ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ
གུར་དཀར་གྱི་གུར་གྱི་མགོ་ལ་བིང་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏང་ངོ།།

207
ཕོ་རོག་ང་སྟེང་ཕྱོགས་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་ལོ།
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ལ་བུ་མོ་གསུམ་འདུག་ལོ།
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་ཧན་དྲང་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ །
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་ཞར་བ་འདུག་ལོ།
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་རྒྱུད་ཅིག་འདུག་ལོ།
རྡ་ལ་ཟ་བའི་ཚུ་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
མི་ལ་ཟ་བའི་ཟན་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
ལམ་འཕྲང་ཆུ་གསུམ་རྩོག་པོ་རང་འདུག་ལོ།
ཤ་ཟོས་ཀྱི་རུས་པ་ཕོ་རོག་ང་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཐོབ།
ཆང་འཐུངས་ཀྱི་སྦང་མ་ཕོ་རོག་ང་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཐོབ་ལོ །
ཕོ་རོག་ང་འོག་ཕྱོགས་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ལ་ཡང་བསླེབ་ལོ།
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྗོགས་པོ་ལ་བུ་མོ་གསུམ་འདུག་ལོ།
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་རྐང་ཞ་རིག་འདུག་ལོ །
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་ལག་ཞ་རིག་འདུག་ལོ།
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་གྲོད་པ་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
རྡ་ལ་ཟ་བའི་རྩ་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
མི་ལ་ཟ་བའི་ཟན་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
ལམ་འཕྲང་ཆུ་གསུམ་རྩོག་པོ་རིག་འདུག།
ཤ་ཟོས་ཀྱི་རུས་པ་ཕོ་རོག་ང་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཐོབ།
ཆང་འཐུངས་ཀྱི་སྦྲང་མ་ཕོ་རོག་ང་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཐོབ།

0
ཕོ་རོག་ང་བར་བཙན་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང།
ཨ་མ་སྐྱབ་བདུན་མ་ལ་བུ་མོ་གསུམ་ཟམ་འདུག་ལོ།
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་སྣ་ཡོན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
བུམོ་གཅིག་ནི་ས་མེད་ཅིག་འདུག་ལོ།
བུ་མོ་གཅིག་ནི་འཇིང་རིངས་ཤིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ལམ་འཕྲང་ཆུ་གསུམ་དེ་རྩོག་པོ་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ད་ལ་ཟླ་བའི་རྩྭ་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
མི་ལ་ཟ་བའི་ཟན་ཡང་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
ཤ་ཟོས་ཀྱི་རུས་པ་ལོ་རོག་ང་ཡང་མ་ཐོབ།
ཆང་འཐུངས་ཀྱི་སྦྱང་མ་ཕོ་རོག་ང་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཐོབ
ཕོ་རོག་ང་གླིང་མཁར་སྟོད་ལ་ཡང་བསླེབ་ལོ།
ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་མ་གསེར་ཁྲིའི་ཁ་འདུག་ལོ།
ཁོག་སྟོད་གསེར་ལ་ཞངས་མཁན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
འོག་སྨད་གཡུ་ལ་ཞངས་མཁན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
དབུ་སྐྲ་གསེར་ལ་ཡོད་མཁན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ཉིད་ལ་མཛེས་པའི་ཇོ་ཇོ་ དེ་ན་འདུག་ལོ།
གུར་དཀར་ལ་མཛེས་པའི་མདུནམ་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྦྱོར་ཏེ་མ་བསླེབ་ལོ།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་དེ་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་འདུག་ལོ། །
དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་རྒས་ཏེ་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ། ་

209
དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་གྲང་གི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་དུ་འདུག་ལོ།
ལམ་འཕྲང་ཆུ་གསུམ་བདེ་མོ་ནང་འདག་ལོ།
རྡ་ལ་ཟ་བའི་རྩྭ་ཡང་འདུག་ལོ། །
མི་ལ་ཟ་བའི་ཟན་ཡང་འདུག་ལོ
ཤ་ཟོས་ཀྱི་རུས་པ་ཕོ་རོག་ང་ལ་ཡང་ཐོབ་ལོ།
ཆང་འཐུངས་ཀྱི་སྦང་མ་ཕོ་རོག་ང་ལ་ཡང་ཐོབ་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། སོག་ལྡེ་
ཞིག་བཏངས་པ། ཕོ་རོག་གཉིས་ཀ་སའི་ཁ་བུད་དེ་ཤི་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཧོར་པ་
ཧལ་ལྡེ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡམ་ཚན་ཞིག་སོང་སྡེ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་ནམ་པཁའ་སྟོང་པ་ནས་ཅི་བུད་
དེ་ཡོངས། ཕོ་རོག་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ཅི་ཕོག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག། ལེན་ཏེ་བལྟ་ཟ་ན་ཕོ་ རོག་
གཉིས་ཀ་ཤི་སྟེ་མེད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཕོ་རོག་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ་ས་ཞིག་བྲུ་སྟེ། དེའི་
ནང་དུ་བཀབ་སྟེ་རོམ་ཁང་ཞིག་བཙོ་སྟེ་བོརས། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྱིས་དེ་
མཚན་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་རྟ་རྐང་གསུམ་དེ་རྐུ་སྟེ་ཁྲིད་དེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་
མའི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང་བ་སང། ཁོ་མདུན་ལ་ཡོང་མ་བཅུགས། ཁྱོ་རང་ལ་
རྡོ་རྐང་གསུམ་ཞུ་བོ་ ཞིག་ཐོབ་སྟེ་འདུག། རྡ་དེ་སུ་ལ་དགོས་ཡིན། ང་ཞའི་ཁྲོ་ན་
རྟའི་སྒོས་སྐལ་མི་བཏང་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཁོ་ལ་སྲོ་བཅོས་པ་སང ! འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་
ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ང་ལ་ཡང་མི་དགོས་ཟེར་ཏེ། རྡ་དེ་འཕུད་བཏངས་པས། རྡོ་རྐྱང་
གསུམ་དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་འབྲང་ལ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཧོར་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་རྟ་རྐང་
གསུམ་ལ་ཞོན་དེ། ཧོར་གྱི་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་དེ་རྟའི་ལྟ་སྐོར་ལ་ཡོངས། ཁོས་རྡ་རྗེས་
27

2io
བཅད་དེ་ཡོངས་པ། གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་ཀུན་ཡོད་ས་རུ་བསླེབ་པས། ཨ་ག་
དཔལ་ལེ་གར་གྱི་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག།།
གུར་ཤིང་གཅིག་གནམ་ལ་སླང་སྟེ་འདུག་ལོ།
གར་ཐོག་གཅིག་ས་ལ་ལྷ་སྟེ་འདུག་ལོ།
དེ་གུར་ནང་དུ་མི་ཆེན་སུ་ཞིག་བཞུགས་ལ།
དེ་གུར་ནང་དུ་དཔའ་བོ་སུ་ཞིག་བཞུགས་ལོ །
ཧོར་པ་ཧལ་ལྡེ་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྡ་ཞིག་སྟོར་ལོ།
ང་རྡོའི་ལྟ་སྐོར་ལ་ཡོངས་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ང་ཞའི་རྟ་དེ་འདིར་བསླེབ་སྡེ་རང་འདུག་ལོ།
ང་ལྟའི་རྟ་དེ་སློག་སྟེ་སྩལ་རོགས་རིག་མཛད་ལོ།
ཐོབ་མ་ལྷགས་ཤིག་རྐུས་པ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྐུས་ལྷགས་ཤིག་ཐོབ་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཧོར་གྱིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཅིག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེས་ལན་དུ་ཡང་ཟེརས།
གནམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ན་ཕོ་རོན་གསུམ་ཨུར་འདུག་ལོ།
ཕོ་རོན་སྔོན་མ་དེ་སྔན་ལ་འཕུད་དེ་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ་
ཕོ་རོན་རྙིང་མ་དེ་སྙིང་ན་བོར་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཕོ་རོན་དཀྱིལ་མ་དེ་ངས་ས་ལ་འཕབ་ཡིན་ལོ།
བུ་སྤུ་གཅིག་གནམ་ལ་ཨན་མི་བཅུག་ལོ
བྱ་ཁྲག་ཅིག་རྩལ་དངུད་མི་བཅུག་ལོ
ཧོར་ངན་སོག་པོ འི་སྒྲའི་མདུན་གྲྭའི་ཁ་ཕོབ་ལོ།

211
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། དཔལ་ལེས་མདའ་ཞིག་བཏུངས་པ། ཕོ་རོན་དཀྱིལ་
མ་དེ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་སྒྲའི་མདུན་གྲྭའི་ཁ་ཕབས་པས། ཧོར་གྱིས་འཇིག་སྟེ།
ཅང་མ་ཟེར་བ། 
ཡང་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྱི་གུར་གྱི་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་
ཞིག་བཏངས།}
གུར་ཤིང་ཞིག་གནམ་ལ་སླང་སྟེ་འདུག་ལོ།
གར་ཐག་ཅིག་ས་ལ་ལྷ་སྟེ་འདུག་ལོ།
དེའི་ནང་ལ་མི་ཆེན་སུ་ཞིག་བཞུགས་ལོ །
དེའི་ནང་ན་དཔའ་བོ་སུ་ཞིག་རང་བཞུགས་ལོ།
ཧོར་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་རྟ་ཞིག་སྟོར་ལོ།
གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་རྟ་དེ་འདིར་འདུག་ལོ།
ང་ཞའི་རྡོ་དེ་འདིར་བསླེབ་སྟེ་རང་འདུག་ལོ།
ང་ཞའི་རྡོ་དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་དོང་ལོ།
ཐོབ་མ་ལྷགས་ཤིག་རྐུས་པ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
རྐུས་ལྷགས་ཤིག་ཐོབ་པ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་བ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ལན་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག།།
ལྔ་ཧོར་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཁྱོད་རྟ་གཅིག་གི་མི་གཅིག་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ཏང |
ང་ཞའི་ཁྲིམས་ལ་ཚེས་བཅུ་བཅོ་ལྔ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱོ་ཞའི་ཁྲིམས་ལ་ཤུ་ཀུར་ཤིང་ཤེར་ཡིན་ལོ །

212
སྟེང་གི་མི་ལ་བཏང་ན་སྡིག་པ་རིག་འདུག་ལོ།
འོག་གི་རྟ་ལ་བཏང་ན་སྡིག་པ་རིག་འདུག་ལོ།
གཞུང་གི་སྒྲ་ལ་མདའ་མོ་ཞིག་བཏུང་ཡིན་ལོ །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་མདའ་ཞིག་བཏངས་པ། ཧོར་གྱི་སྒོའི་མདུན་གྲྭ་ལ་ཕོག་
སྡེ་མེད་མཁན་བཅོས་བཏངས་པ། ཧོར་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་འཇིགས་ཏེ། འཁྲུལ་རྟ་རྐང་
གསུམ་དེ་ལ་སྐད་ཅིག་བཏང་སྡེ་ན། བང་དྲག་པོ་ཞིག་ཁྱེརས་པ། རྟ་དེ་ཚང་མ་
སྲིབ་གཅིག་ལ་མཉམ་པོ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་འབྲང་ལ་རྟ་
ཚང་མ་འཁྲིད་དེ་བསླེབ་སོང།།
ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུས་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཟེརས། ང་ཏང་གི་རྟ་ཚང་མ་
གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་ཀུན་གྱིས་ཁྱེར་ཏེ་འདུག། གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་ ཚང་མ་ལུང་
པའི་ཕུ་ཞིག་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་འདུག། མཁར་དེའི་ནང་དུ་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་གཅིག་པོ་
ཡོད་ཚོད་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་གུར་དཀར་གྱོལ་པོས་ཆེན་ཟེར་ཏེ། དམག་
དང་ཚང་མ་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་སོང། ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་ལ་སོང་བས། དེ་ནས་
ཨ་གུ་འཁྲའི་ཐུང་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བིང་སྟེ། ཧོར་ལ་གཏམ་ལན་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏིངས།།
ཁྱེད་རྟ་མངས་ཀྱི་མི་མངས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཁྱོད་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་དེས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀུན་མདའ་རྩེས་ལ་དགའ་ན་འདིར་ཡོང་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀུན་མདུང་རྩེས་ལ་དགའ་ན་འདིར་ཡོང་ལོ
མདའ་རྩེས་བཏང་ན་ང་ཏང་གིས་བཏང་ཡིན་ལོ །

21 }
མདུང་རྩེས་བཏང་ན་ང་ཏང་གིས་བཏང་ཡིད་ལོ །
ཤ་སྙིང་ལ་དགའ་ན་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
མར་སྙིང་ལ་དགའ་ན་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ཇོ༌ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ལ་དགའ་ན་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུར་ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་གྱིས། ང་ཞ་མདའ་རྩེས་དང་མདུང་རྩེས་ལ་
མི་འཐད། ཤ་སྙིང་དང་མར་སྙིང་དང། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་འཐད་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཕྱིར་
ལོག་སྟེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང༌།།
No. 3.
དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲ་ག་མ་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཡོང་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ། གཡུ་
ཚང་མ་འཕུད་དེ་སྐྲ་ལ་པ་ལོ་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ་ཁྲབ་རྨོག་གོན་ཏེ། མདའ་དང་རལ་གྲི་
འཁར་ཏེ་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་བཏབས་སོ །།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ་དག་མཁྱེན་ནོ།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་དགུ་མཁྱེན་ནོ།
པས་ལྷ ཀེར་ཟོང་སྙན་པོ་མཁྱེན་ལོ།
མས་ལྷ་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་མཁྱེན་ནོ །
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་དཔུང་རོགས་མཛད་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར ཏེ། ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཁྲོ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་མང་
པོ་བསད་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཧོར་གྱི་ཤན་ཀྲ་མོ་རུས་ཟེརས་པ། འདི བོ་བུ་ཚ་ཞིག་
མེན། བུ་མོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཚོད་འདག། ཚང་མས་ཀུ་ཅོ་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་གྱི་

21
དམག་ཚང་མས་ཀ་ཅོ་བཏངས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟེ་མཁར་གྱི་ནང་ལ་
ལོག་སྟེ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཚང་མས་དབང་བཙོ་སྡེ་མཁར་གྱི་ནང་དུ་
སོང་བས། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་བཙོ་ཐབས་ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པ། ཧོར་གུར་དཀར་གྱི་གཉིད་མེད་
བཅོ་སྟེ། མཁར་གྱི་ཤ་སྙིང་མར་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཟ་འིན་ཞིག་འདུགས། ཞག་ཁ་
ཤས་ཤིག་སོང་སྡེ་ན་ཧོར་གུར་དཀར་གྱིས་ཟེརས། ད་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་ཡིན་
འགྲལ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལེ་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་ཤ་སྙིང་ཟ་ཚར་དེ་མེན་ནས་མི་ཆ་ཟེརས།
ཤ་སྙིང་ཟ་ལ་ལོ་དགུ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཡང་འགྲུལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཡང་ཇོ་ ངོས་མར་
སྙིང་ཟ་ཚར་དེ་མེན་ནས་མི་ཆ་ཟེར་ཏེ་འདུགས་པ། མར་སྙིང་ཟ་ལ་ལོ་དགུ་སོང།།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་འགྲུལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ངོས། མདའ་གང་ས་
ནང་མ་ཐུག་པ། མདའ་གང་གནམ་ནང་མ་ཐུག་པ་རིལ་མང་གི་མཁར་ཞིག་ཅེས།
དེ་ནས་ང་ཆེན་ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཚང་མས་རིལ་མང་བསྡུས་ཏེ། མཁར་
རྩིགས་པ། ལོ་དག་སོང། དེ་ཟམ་སྲིངས་པ། ཀེ་སར་མ་བསླེབ་སོང།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཧོར་གྱིས་འགྲུལ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་ཡང་ཅང་
ཐབས་མེད་མཁན་སོང། གླིང་མཁར་རི་ནང་དུ་ཅི་ཡང་མེད་མཁན་སོང། ཇོ ཇོས་
ཆེན་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ཇོ འི་གོན་ཅེས་ཚང་མ་དང༌། བདག་སྐྱེ་ཚང་མ་གཡོག་
མོ་ལ་སྐོན་ཏེ་ན། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཁོ་རང་ཆིབས་རའི་ནང་དུ་ལུད་བྲུ་སྟེ། དེའི་ནང་དུ་ཟངས་
ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་ཁ་ཟུབ་ལ་བཏང་སྟེ་ཡིབ་སྡེ་འདུགས། ཧོར་གྱིས་གཡོག་མོ་དེ་
ཇོ་ཇོ་ཡིན་ནོག་བསམ་སྟེ། མཁར་ནང་ནས་ཕིང་སྟེ་འཁྲིད་དེ་འཁྱེར་་རད་ཚུག་པ།
གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་མཇུག་ལ་ཨ་བི་རྒད་མོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཧོར་ལ་ཟེརས།
གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ། གླིང་གི་ཤ་སྙིང་ཟ་ཚར ། མར་སྙིང་ཟ་ཚར། ཇོ་ ཇོ་

215
འབྲུ་གུ་ཡང་ཉེ་རང་ལ་ཐོབ། གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་རི་ཆིབས་རའི་ནང་དུ་རྟ་
རྒྱགས་ཤིག་མ་བཏང་བ། སྐྱོད་ཡིན་ན་ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་གྱི་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུས་དེ་
བོ་བདེན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཧོར་རྟ་ཞིག་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་ཆིབ་རའི་ནང་དུ་བང་གཅིག་བཏངས་པ།
དེའི་ནང་ན་ཇོ་ཇོ འི་སྐྲ་ཞིག་རྟའི་རྐང་པ་ལ་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་དེའི་ནང་ནས་བིང་
སྡེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཧོར་གྱིས་འཁྲིད་དེ་ཁྱེརས། ལྡེམ་མཁར་གྱི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་
ཨ་གུ་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་བལྟ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པ། ཇོ་ ངོས་ཀླུ་ཞིག།།
གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོ་དེ་བདད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྦྱོར་སོང།
གླིང་གི་ཤ་སྙིང་ཟ་ལ་ལོ་དགུ་སོང།
གླིང་གི་མར་སྙིང་ཟ་ལ་ལོ་དགུ་སོང།
རིལ་མང་གི་མཁར་རྩིག་པ་ལོ་དགུ་སོང།
དེ་ཟམ་ཚུག་པ་ཀེ་སར་མ་བསླེབ་ལོ །
སྔོན་ལ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཞུབ་ཤི་མང་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་པིན།
དག་ས་ཞབ་ཤི་གཅིག་ཀྱང་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
ཇོ་ཇོ་ང་རང་ཧོར་གྱིས་འཁྱེར་འདུག་ལོ།
ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་དུས་ལ་དཔའ་བོ་མང་ཟམ་ཡོད་པིན།
དག་ས་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཡོང་ཟ་ན་དཔའ་བོ་གཅིག་ཀྱང་མི་འདུག།
ཇོ་ཇོ ས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། སུ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། མགྱོགས་
པ་དམག་ཆས་བཏང་སྟེ། ཧོར་གྱི་རྩར་སོང་སྟེ་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་ཞིག་བསད་བཏངས།
དེ་ནས་ཧོར་གྱི་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུས་ཀུ་ཅོ་ དོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཚང་མས་ཀུ་

༡16
སོ་དྲག་པོ་བཏངས་པ། ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་འཇིགས་ཏེ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་སྟེ་ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མི་
ལྡེམ་མཁར་ནང་ད་སོང་བས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ཧོར་གྱིས་འཁྲིད་དེ་འཁྱེརས། ཐང་ཞིག་གི་
ཁ་བསླེབ་པ། དེ་རུ་ཨང་གར་ལངས་པ་དང་ཐུག་སོང་པ། ཧོར་གྱིསཟུམ་སྟེ་
བཙོན་ལ་བཅུག་པ་འཁྱེརས། དེ་ནས་གླང་གི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་དུ་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་
ལ་ཚོར། གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་ཤ་སྙིང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟོས། མར་སྙིང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟོས།
གླིང་མཁར་བཤིག་སྟེ་ཤལ་མ་ལ་སྒྱུརས། ཇོ༌ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་གུར་དཀར་གྱིས་
འདུན་མ་ལ་ཁྱེརས།།
No, 4.
ང་དང་ལྟ་ལ་ཆ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལྟ་ལ་ཨོངས་པ།
གླིང་མཁར་སྟོད་དེ་ཅང་མེད་མཁན་བཙོ་སྟེ་ཧོར་གྱིས་འཁྱེར་དེ་མེད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་
འབུ་དམར་ལ་བསྟན་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྡེ ། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེ་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་
ཞིག་བཏངས་སོ །།
ངའི་ཨ་གས་འང་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་འང་བདག་ལ་གསནལོ །
གླིང་མཁར་སྟོད་ལ་དམག་ཆེན་ཞིག་བསླེབ་ཏོག།
གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཆེན་ཞིག་ཡོངས་ཏོག།
གླིང་གི་ཤ་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟོས་ཏོག།
གླིང་གི་མར་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟོས་ཏོག།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་འདྲིད་དེ་འཁྱེརས་ལོ །
དུང་གི་སྐྱིད་བུ་ཨཱང་འཁྱེར་དེ་མི་འདུག་ལོ།

a17
གསེར་ཉ་ཟུངས་གཅིག་ཡང་འཁྱེར་དེ་མི་འདུག།
གཡུ་ཉ་ཟུངས་གཅིག་ཡང་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་མི་འདུག།
རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་ཡང་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་མི་འདུག།
ཕོ་ལད་དེ་གྱད་གཞུ་ཡང་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་མི་འདུག་ལོ།།
དེའི་ཕི་ལ་ང་བདས་དེ་རང་ཆེན་ལོ། །
རྡོ་དེ་རྡ་གསར་རྒྱལ་ལ་རྡ་རྒན་རིག་རྒྱལ་ལོ།
གཞུ་དེ་གཞུ་གསར་རྒྱལ་ལ་གཞུ་རྒན་རིག་རྒྱལ་ལོ།
མདུང་དེ་མདུང་གསར་རྒྱལ་ལ་མདུང་རྒན་ ག་རྒྱུལ་ལོ།
མདའ་དེ་མདའ་གསར་རྒྱལ་ལ་མདའ་རྒན་གྱོལ་ལོ།
གྲི་དེ་གྲྭ་གསར་རྒྱལ་ལ་གི་རྒན་རིག་གྲོལ་ལོ།
ཁྲབ་དེ་ཁྲབ་གསར་རྒྱལ་ལ་ཁྲབ་རྒན་རྒྱལ་ལོ།
རྨོག་དེ་རྨོག་གསར་རྒྱལ་ལ་རྨོག་རྒན་རྒྱལ་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། ཨ་གུས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་ཞིག།
ཨ་གའི་ཚ་བོས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
དཔལ་ལེ་འི་ཚ་བོས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
ཨ་གའི་ཚ་བོ་ལ་ཞུལ་ལྟ་བཏང་དགོས་ཡང་མེད་ལོ།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལ་བསླབ་བྱ་བཏང་དགོས་རང་མེད་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་རྡ་གསར་མ་ཁྱེར་རྡ་རྒན་རིག་ཁྱེད་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་གཞུ་གསར་མ་ཁྱེར་གཞུ་རྒན་རིག་ཁྱེར་ལོ
28

218
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་མདུང་གསར་མ་ཁྱེར་མདུང་གན་རིག་ཁྱེར་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་མདའ་གསར་མ་ཁྱེར་མདའ་རྒན་རིག་ཁྱེར་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་གྲི་གསར་མ་ཁྱེར་གྱི་རྒན་རིག་ཁྱེད་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཁྲབ་གསར་མ་ཁྱེར་ཁྲབ་རྒན་རིག་ཁྱེར་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་རྨོག་གསར་མ་ཁྱེར་རྨོག་རྒན་རིག་ཁྱེར་ལོ།
གུན་གྱེན་གྱེན་ལ་སེང་གེ་མཆོང་ལུགས་ཆོས།
ཐུར་ཐུར་ཐུར་ལ་ལྔ་མོ་འབྱོལ་འགྲོས་ནོས།
འདབས་འདུབ ་འདབས་ལ་པོ་རོག་ཟུར་མཆོངས་ཏོང།
རལ་གྲི་པ་བརྒྱ་བའི་གཡོན་ལ་མ་འདུག།
དུ་བོག་པ་བརྒྱའི་གཡས་ཕྱོགས་ལ་མ་ཆ།
ཨ་གའི་ཚ་བོ་ལ་བསླབ་བྱ་བཏང་དགོས་རིག་མེད་ལོ །
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལ་ཞལ་ལྟ་ངཏང་དགོས་མེད་ལོ།
ཨ་གས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྱིས། ཨ་གས་
་་མཁན་ནང་ལྟར་ཚང་མ་འཁུར་ཏེ་ཧོར་ལ་བདས་ཏེ་སོང། ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེས་
གཏམ་གཅིག་བསླབ་པར་བརྗོད་སོང། ག་ས་ཁྱད་ཅིག་ལ་སྐོམས་ན་བུབ་ཆུ་མ་
མཐུང༌། གན་ནི་རོགས་བུ་མ་གྲོལ་ཟེར་ཅེས་བརྗོད་སོང། དེ་ནས་འབུ་དམར་
ལམ་བསྟན་མགྱོགས་པ་སོང་སྟེ། ཧོར་ལ་ནོན་སོང་བས། གྱེན་ལ་སེང་གེ་
མརོངས་ལུགས་བཅོས། ཐུར་ལ་ལྔ་མོ་འབྱོལ་འགྲོས་བཅོ་འིན་ཞིག་དང།
ཧོར་གྱི་དཔག་བྱེད་ཟམ་བསད་དེ་ན། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་རྟའི་ཁ་སྤྲུབ་སྟེ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་

219
སྟེ་ཁྱོངས་པ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ངལ་དེ། རྡའི་ཁ་གཉིད་ཡོང་གིན་ཞིག་
ཡོངས་པ། ཧོར་གྱི་ཤུན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་ང་རང་ནས་ཡོང་སྟེ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་
བསྟན་ལ་ཚོར་མ་བཅུག་པ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་ཟེརས། ཇོ༌ ཇེ་ལེ་ཧོར་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་
དང་མ་ཉམ་པོ་འདུག་སྟེ་ལོ་འདི་ཟམ་སོང། དོ་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་མ་འཕང་
ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ངོས་ ་བཙོ་ཐབས་མི་ཡོང་ཡིན། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྱི་
གཟུགས་པོ་ཚང་མ་ཕོ་ལད་ལ་ཡོད། མང་གཡོག་གི་ནང་ལ་ཤུ་མེ་ལོང་ཟས་
ཞིག་མན་ནས་མེད། ཅང་བཅོ་མི་ཉན་ཟེརས་པ། ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་རང་
གིས་ཅི་ཐབས་བཅོ་ ནའང་ཅོས་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ངོས་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་ལ་བསླབ་
སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོ་རང་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཨ་རུ་རན་འཐག་ཅིག་ཡོད་། དེ་རན་
འཐག་གི་གཡོག་ཁང་ནང་དུ་སོང་སྟེ་འདུག། ངས་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ནི་གན་
ནི་རོགས་བུ་འགྲོལ་ཏེ། རན་འཐག་གི་ཝ་མགོ་ན་ཆུ་ཞིག་འཐུང་བཅུག་ཡིན།
ཁྱེ་རང་གིས་ཝུའི་ནང་ནས་མདའ་དེ་ཆང་གཡོག་ལ་བལྟ་སྟེ་ཏོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོ་ཤི་
ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་རན་འཐག་གི་ནང་ད་ཞག་སྟེ་
འདུགས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་དང་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གཉིས་ཀ་རན་འཐག་གི་
མདན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང། ངོ་ངོས་ཟེརས་པ། ནོ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལེ། ནོ་རང་
ལ་དག་ས་གཉིད་ཡོང་འདུག། འདི་རུ་ཙ་བིག་འདུག་ཡིན། གན་ནི་རོགས་
བུ་གྲོལ། རན་འཐག་གི་ལྔ་མགོ་ན་ཆུ་ཞིག་འཐུང། ཧོར་གྱི་ཁ་རྒྱལ་ཏེ་ང་འཁྲིད་
དེ་ཁོངས་པ་སང། མང་པོ་འཐད་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། འབུ་དཔར་ལཔ་བསྟན་གྱིས་
རྒྱལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ་ཟེར་ཏེ། རྡའི་ཁ་ནས་བབ་སྡེ་ཀུན་ནི་རོགས་བུ་༢ཀློལ་དེ། ངན་

aa0
འཐག་གི་ཟླ་མགོ་ན་བུབ་ཆུ་ཞིག་འཐུངས་པ་སང། དེ་ཚུག་པ་ཤན་ཀྲུ་མི་རུས་
རན་འཐག་གི་ནང་ནས་འདའ་རྒྱབས་པ སང། མདའ་དེ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་
གྱི་ཆང་གཡོག་ལ་ཕོག་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོས་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལ་དབང་
བྱས་ཏེ། ཧོར་གྱི་ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་དང་མཉམ་པོ་སོང་བའི ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་
ལ་མདའ་ཕོག་སྟེ་དེ་རུ་ལུས་འདུགས།།
དེ་ནས་དེ་རུ་དཔལ་ལ་རྒོད་པོ་བསླེབ་པས། ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་
ལ་མདའ་ཕོག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ། ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟ་ཟེརས། སྔོན་ལ་ངས་
གཏམ་གཅིག་བསླབ་པ་བརྗེད་སོང་འབུ་དམར་ལེ་ཟེརས་པ། འབུ་དམར་གྱིས་
ཟེརས། ང་ཤི་ཡིན་ན་གསོན་ཡིན་ཨ་གུ་ལེ། དཔལ་ལེས་ཟེརས། ཕན་དུ་ཕན་
ཡིནབ། སྔོན་ལ་ང་ཧོར་ལ་བདས་ཏེ་ཆེནཱ། འབུ་དམར་གྱིས་ཟེརས། དག་
ང་ཕན་བཅུག་ཨ་ག་ལེ། དྲུང་ན་ང་སོང་སྡེ་ཧོར་གྱི་རིགས་ལུས་མི་བཅུག། དེ་ཟུག་
ཟེར་ནའང༌། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེས་དབང་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཧོར་ལ་བདས་ཏེ་སོང་བ། ཤན་ཀྲ་
མི་རུ་དེ་ཅིང་ན་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཆུའི་ཕར་ཁ་ན་ཆ་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་ཧོར་ངན།
ཁྱེ་རང་གིས་ང་ཞའི་ཕྲུ་ག་ཞིག་དང་གད་འགྲན་བཏངས་སོག་པ། དག་ས་ང་དང་
གྱད་ཅིག་མི་འགྲན་ན་ཟེརས་པ། ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུས་རྒྱལ་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་མདའ་
དེ་གང་པོས་སྔོན་ལ་བཏིང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུས་ངས་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེརས།
དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེས་ཧོར་ལ་འདྲི་སྟེ། ཁྱོ་དང་གི་མདའ་ག་རུ་ཕོག་ཅེས་ཡིན་
ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་གྱིས་དྲང་པོ་ཟེརས། ངའི་མདའ་དེ་མིག་ལ་རྒྱབ་ན། སྙིང་ལ་
ཕོག་ཅས་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། དཔལ་ལེས།

211
ཨར་མཆོངས་འདིར་མཆོངས་མ་བཏང་ན་ཁྱོད་སྔོ་རོག་གི་པོན་པོན་མེན་ལོ 
དྲར་ཆད་དྲུར་ཆད་མ་བཏང་ན་ཁྱོད་རྡོ་ཆོད་མ་རལ གྲི་མེན་ལོ །
རལ་གྲི་བཏང་སྟེ་མ་ཕོག་ན་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་ང་ལ་མ་ཟེར་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་དང། དཔལ་ལེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་རྡོ་བ་ཆོད་མ་རལ་གྲི་
དང་རྒྱབ་སྟེ། ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུ་ཁག་པོ་གཉིས་བཅོས་བཏང་སྟེ། ཁོ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་
ཤི་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོ འི་ལྤགས་པ་ཤུ་སྟེ། ས་ཞིབ་མོ་ཞིག་སྐང་སྟེ། ཁོ་རང་གི་
རྟའི་ཁ་བཀལ་ཏེ། ལྤགས་པ་ལ་བི་གང་མང་པོ་ཕིང་སྡེ་ན། རྡ་འཕུད་བཏངས་པ།
བང་དྲག་པོ་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག་ཧོར་དམག་གི་མདུན་ལ་སོང་པ། ལྤགས་པའི་བི་གང་
ཚང་མའི་ནང་ནས་ས་བིང་སྟེ། ཐལ་རྩུབ་བྱིང་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ། ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་
ཚང་མ་འཇིགས། དེ་ནས་གུར་དཀར་གྱིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལེ་གླིང་
ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་ནས་རྡ་པ་དྲག་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོང་འདུག། དེ་སུ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས།
དེ་རྡ་པ་ཀི་རྩ་བ་ལ་པོ་ཡིན་ཚོད་འདག་ཁོ་ལ་ཅི་བཅོ་ནའང། མི་ཉན་ཟེརས་པ།
ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་དེ་ཚང་མ་འཇིག་སྟེ་སུ་ཆུའི་ནང་ལྕེབས། སུས་རང་དང་རང་གི་
བཏང་སྟེ་ཤི་སོང། རྙིང་ན་བལྟ་ཟ་ན། ཤན་ཀྲ་མི་རུའི་ལྤགས་པ་དང་ཁོའི་རྟ་
ཡིན་ནོག། 
དེ་ནས་གུར་དཀར་དང་དམག་དང་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཚང་མ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་སྟེ
ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང།།
དཔལ་ལེ་ལོག་སྟེ་བསླེབ་བསླེབ་ལ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྱི་
མདུན་ལ། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་བསླེབ་སྟེ། ཁོས་ཧོར་ངན་གྱི་མདའ་འཁར་དེ ། ཅི་ལ་འདུག་
ཡིན་ཟེར་དེ་འཕུད་བཏངས་པ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྱི་སྙིང་དེ་མདའི་དིའུ་ལ་
འཁད་དེ་ཕིང་སྡེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ། དཔལ་ལེ་བསླེབ་ཟ་ན། བཅོ་ཐབས་མེད་མཁན་སོང་

223
སྡེ་ཤི་ཅས་ལ་ཁ་ཐུག་སོང་སྟེ། འབུ་དམར་གྱིས་ཨ་ག་དང་ལ་ལེ་ལ་ཁ་ཆེམས་
ཤིག་བོརས།།
ངའི་ཨ་གས་འང་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
དེ་རིང་བུ་ཚ་ང་ཤི་ཅིས་རིག་རག་ལོ །
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ཤི་ཅེས་ལ་ཐག་ལོ།
ཤར་ལ་བལྟས་པའི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་ན།
རྡ་མང་པོ འི་ཁྱུ་ཞིག་རང་ཡོད་ལོ །
དེ་ལ་ཁག་པོ་གསུམ་ཟཔ་ཅོས་ལོ།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ཞིག་སོབ་ཅོས།
ཁག་གཅིག་བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་གི་དོན་ཞིག་ཅེས།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་རྗེད་གེ་སར་ལ་བོར།
ལྷོ་རུ་བལྟས་པའི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་ན།
ར་མ་མང་པོའི་ཁྱུ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ །
དེ་ལ་ཁག་པོ་གསུམ་ཟམ་ཅོས་ལོ།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ཞིག་སོབ་སོ།
ཁག་གཅིག་བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་གི་དོན་ཞིག་ཅེས།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་རྗེད་ཀེ་སར་ལ་བོར་ལོ །
ནབ་ལ་བལྟས་པའི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་ན།
ཡག་འབྲི་མང་པོའི་ཁྱུ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ།

223
དེ་ལ་ཁག་པོ་གསུམ་ཟམ་མོས་ལོ།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ཞིག་སོབ་ཅོས།
ཁག་གཅིག་བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་གི་དོན་ཆོས་ལོ།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་རྗེད་གེ་སར་ལ་བོར །
བྱང་དུ་བལྟས་པའི་ལུང་པའི་ནང་ན།
ལུག་དང་ལུག་གའི་ཁུ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེ་ལ་ཁག་པོ་གསུམ་ཟམ་ཅེས་ལོ།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ཞིག་སོབ་ཅེས།
ཁག་གཅིག་བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་གི་དོན་ཅོས་ལོ།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་རྗེད་ཀེ་སར་ལ་བོར།
ཤར་ལ་གཟིགས་པའི་རབ་སལ་པོ འི་ནང་ན།
གསེར་གྱི་རན་འཐག་རང་འཁོར་ཡོད།
ལྷོ་ལ་གཟིགས་པའི་རབ་སལ་པའི་ནང་ན།
མུ་ཏིག་གི་གྲུ་ག་ཡོད་ལོ།
ནབ་ལ་གཟིགས་པའི་རབ་སལ་པོ འི་ནང་ན།
ཟངས་ཀྱི་ཁྱི་ག་མུག་ཤེས་ཡོད་ལོ །
བྱང་ལ་གཟིགས་པའི་རབ་སལ་པོ འི་ནང་ན།
དུང་གི་ལུག་ག་འབྲག་ཤེས་ནང་ཡོད་ལོ།
དེ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཁག་གསུམ་ཅེས་ལོ། །
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་ཞིག་སོབ་སོས།

22
ཁག་གཅིག་བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་གི་དོན་ཞིག་ཆོས།
ཁག་གཅིག་གླིང་རྗེད་གེ་སར་ལ་བོར་ལོ།
གལ་ཏེ་ཀེ་སར་བདུད་ཡུལ་ནས་བསླེབ་ཟེར་ན།
ཁ་དམར་མོ་འབྲུ་གུ་ཡང་ཁྱོང་ཡིན་འགྲོ །
ལོ་གསུམ་མགོ འི་ཁ་འོལ་དོབ་ཟེར།
ལོ་གསུམ་ར་མའི་ར་རྫི་ལ་བོར་ཟེར །
ལོ་གསུམ་ལུག་གི་ལུག་རྫི་ལ་བོར་ཟེར།
ལོ་གསུམ་བ་གླང་གི་བ་རྫི་ལ་བོར་ཟེར།
ལོ་གསུམ་ཡུལ་པའི་མཐོང་ཀོལ་ལ་དོང་ཟེར །
ལོ་གསུམ་མཁར་གྱི་ཆུ་མ་ལ་བོར་ཟེར།
དི་ཟུག་བསླབ་བྱ་ཚང་མ་ཟེར་ཏེ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྲོངས་སོང།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་ཡིས་སྤུར་དེ་རི་མཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་ལ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ། མེ་ལ་བསྲེག་
ནས་སྤུར་ཁང་ཞིག་བཅོ་སྟེ་བོར་ནས། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེ གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཞག་
རེ་ལ་ཕོ་ཐུར་མངས་གང་རེ་འགམ་མིན་ཞིག་མྱ་ངན་ལ་འདུགས། རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀ་
སར་དེ་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྟོར།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ཧོར་གྱིས་བསདས།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དག་ཤལ་མ་ལ་གྱུར།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་འཁྱེརས།
བསམ་སྟེ་སྡུག་བཅོ་སྡེ་འདགས།།

225
No. 5.
དེ་ནས་ཞག་ཅིག་ལ་ཡུལ་མཇུག་གི་ཨ་བི་དཔལ་ལེའི་མདུན་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་
ཟེརས། ལྤ་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་ཁྱེད་སྡུག་བཅོ་སྟེ་མ་འདུག། ཀེ་སར་ཤི་ནས་དང་
སྟོར་ནས་མི་ཡོང། བྱ་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དཀར་མོ་ཀུན་ལྟ་ལ་བཏང་ན་ཐོབ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ།
དཔལ་ལེས་སྲོ་བཅོ་སྟེ་རང་མ་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཞག་ཅིག་ལ་ཨ་བི་ཡང་ཡོང་སྟེ་
ཟེརས་པ། དཔལ་ལ་ཡིད་ཆེས་ཏེ་བྱ་ཀུན་ཁྱོངས་པ། བྱ་ཀུན་ལ་ཟ་ཅེས་བཏང་
མཁན་མེད་པ་སང། ཤེད་མེད་མཁན་སོང་སྡེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེས་
ཞག་དང་འཁྲུ་འིན་ཞིག། ཟ་ཅེས་རྒྱལ་ལ་བཏང་ཛིན་ཞིག་བོརས། དེ་ནས་ཞག་
ཅིག་ཚོད་བལྟས་པ། གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ལན་ཅིག་ཀྱང་འཁོར་མ་ཐུབ་སོང། ཡང་
ཞག་བདུན་བོར་ཏེ་བལྟས་པ། གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ལན་ཅིག་ཁོར། ཡང་ཞག་བདུན་
སོང་སྟེ་ལན་གསུམ་བོར། དེ་ཟུག་གི་ལན་དག་འཁོར་འཁོར་ཚུག་པ་གསོས་
བཏང་གིན་ཞིག་བོརས་པ། ཞུག་ཅིག་ལན་དག་ཁོར་སོང། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེས་
ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཡི་གེ་ཞིག་བྲིས། ལྷ་བསམ་མེད་ཀེ་སར ཝ་གླིང་རྗེད་ཀེ་སར་གར་
ཡོད། འདིར་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་ཡོང་སྟེ་བཅོ་ཐབས་མེད་མཁན་སོང།
ཤ་སྙིང་ཟ་ལ་ལོ་དགུ་འབུད། མར་སྙིང་ཟ་ལ་ལ་དག་འབུད། ཟན་སྙིང་ཟ་ལ་
ལོ་དག་འབུད། རིལ་མང་གྱི་མཁར་བརྩིག་པ་ལོ་དབ་འབུད། དེ་ཚག་པ་ཀེ་སར་
བསླེབ་མ་བསླེབ། གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུ་ཤལ་མ་ལ་གྱུར། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུག་མ་ཧོར་
གྱིས་འཁྱེརས། བུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ཧོར་གྱིས་བསདས། གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་ནུར་
བུ་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་འཁྱེརས། ཨང་གར་ལངས་པ་ཧོར་གྱིས་བཙོན་ལ་བཏང་བ་
འཁྱེརས། དུང་གི་སྐྱིད་བུ་དང་གསེར་ཉ། དུང་། ཕོ་ལད་གུད་གཞུ? རྡ་ཕོ་ཁ་
29

228
ལ་མེ་འབར་ཚང་མ་འཁྱེརས། ཁྱོད་བསམ་པ་མེད་མཁན་གར་ཡོད། དཔལ་
ལེ་ང་རང་སྡུག་གི་ནང་དུ་ཡོད། དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཡི་གེ་གཉིས་བྲི་སྟེ། བྱ་གཉིས་
ཀ་ལ་རེ་རེ་བཀལ་ཏེ་བཏངས། །
བྱ་དེ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཡི་གེ་རེ་རེ་འཁོར་ཏེ། སྔོན་ལ་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་
སོང་བས། ཁོང་ཤིང་རྒྱལ་ཞིག་གི་ཁ་དགོངས་ལ་ལུས། ཤིང་རྒྱལ་དེའི་གཡོག་
ལ་སྲིན་མོ་མ་བུ་གཉིས་ཡང་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་ནས་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་འཇུགས་པ་སང།
གནམ་མ་ལངས་པ་རིག་ལ། སྲིན་མོའི་བུ་མོས་ཨ་མ་ལ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་ཨ་མ།
གླིང་ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་དག་ས་གར་ཡོད་ཚུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་མས་ཟེརས།
ལྔ་བུ་མོ། གླིང་ཀི་སར་མེད་པ། ང་ཏང་ལ་ཟ་ཅེས་ལ་རྟ་རོ་ཟ་ནའང༌། མི་རོ་ཟླ་
ནའང་ཐོབ་སྟེ་ཡིན་ནོག། ཀེ་སར་ཡོད་ཡིན་ན། ང་དང་བསད་དེ་ག་ན་ལུས་ཡིན།
གླིང་པའི་མི་ཉན་ཏེ་ཡོང་ཆེན་རུབ་ཅད་དེ་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་བུ་མོ་དེ་ཕྱི་
སྟ་རུ་བལྟས་པ། སུ་ཡང་མེད་ཚུག། བུ་མོས་ཟེརས། མི་སུ་ཡང་མིན་འདུག།
ཟེར་འང་ཨ་མ་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་མས། ཀེ་སར་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཇོ་མོ་
བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་དང་གཉིས་ཀས་ཆོ་ལོ་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག། གླིང་མཁར་དང་ཟན་
ནོར་ཅི་ཡོད་མཁན་ཚང་མ་ཆོ་ལོ་ལ་བཙུག་སྟེ་བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་ལ་ཐོབ་ཚར །
དག་ས་ཁོང་རང་གཉིས་ཀའི་རྩི་བི་ཏིང་ཀུན་བཙུག་སྟེ་ཆོ་ལོ་ རྩེའད། རྩི་བི་ཏིང་
ཡང་བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་ལ་ཐོབ་ན་ཀེ་སར་ཡང་ཤི་ཡིན་འགྲོ་ཟེརས་པ། བྱ་གཉིས་
ཀ་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་ཚོར་ཏེ། ཀུང་ཀུང་ཟེར་ཏེ ། འཕུར་ཏེ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཨ་མ་ལ་
སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་བུ་མོ་ལ་རྡོ་བ་ཆེན་མོ་ ཞིག་སྒྲུབ་སྡེ། བུ་མོ་དེ་སྲིབ་གཅིག་ལ་ཤིསོང།
རྡོ་བ་དེ་པར་ཕོག་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཨ་མ་ཁོ་རང་ལ་ཕོག་སྡེ་རྟིང་ན་ཨ་མ་ཡང་ཤི་སོང༌།།

327
དེ་ནས་བྱ་གཉིས་ཀ་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་བལྟས་ཏེ་སོང་བས
། བུ་གཉིས་ཀ་
བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ། མཁར་གྱི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། ཀེ་སར་དང་
བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་གཉིས་ཀ་ཆོ་ལོ་བཏང་གིན་ཞིག] ཨ་ར་ར་འུ་རུ་རུ་ཟེར་རིན
ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། བུ་གཉིས་ཀས་སྐད་ཅིག་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་ལ་སྐད་དེ་
ཆོར་ཏེ་ཟེརས་པ། ཉོན་ཇོ་མོ། 
ངའི་གླིང་མཁར་གྱི་བུ་ཀུན་གྱི་སྐད་ཅིག་རག་
ཟེརས་པ། 
བམ་ཟ་བུམ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་བྱ་དེ་ག་ནས་ཡོད་ཟེར་དེ་ཐེབ་ཀུ་ཅོ་
བཏངས། 
དེ་ནས་བྱ་ཀུན་གྱིས་ཤེད་དང་སྐད་ཅིག་བཏངས་པ
། ཀེ་སར་ལ་གསལ་
པོ་ ཆོར་སོང། 
ཀེ་སར་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བིང་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། བདེན་བ། བྱ་དེ་ནམ་
མཁའ་ན་ཡོད་ཚུག། 
དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཕིང་དཀར་ཞིག་བཏིང་སྟེ། དེའི་ཁ་
གསོན་ཤ་ཞིག་བོརས། ཕིང་ནག་ཅིག་བཏིང་སྟེ། དེའི་ཁ་ཤི་ཤ་ཞིག་བོརས།
དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
ངའི་བུ་མོ་གཉིས་ཀས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
བྱ་དེ་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དཀར་མོ་ཀུན་བདག་ལ་གསན།
གླིང་མཁར་བདེ་མོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཟེར་ན།
ཕིང་དཀར་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་གསོན་ཤ་དེ་ཟོ་ལོ།
གླིང་མཁར་བདེ་མོ་ཞིག་མེད་ཟེར་ན།
ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རི་སྡེ་ཤི་ཤ་དེ་ཟེ་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང] 
བྱ་ཀུན་གྱིས་ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རི་སྟེ་ཤི་ཤ་དེ་ཟོས
དེ་ཟུག་ཤེས་ཏེ། ཀེ་སར་མུན་ཏེ་ས་ལ་འགྱེལ་སོང་བ། བྱ་ཀུན་གྱིས་གེ་སར་རི་

༡༡9
ཁའི་ནང་དུ་བྱ་རྐྱག་རེ་བཏངས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་མུན་སང་སྟེ། ཝ་བྱ་ཁམ་
ལོག་ཀུན། ངའི་ཁའི་ནང་བྱ་རྐྱག་བཏངོས་ཟེར་ཏེ ། ཀེ་སར་མང་པོ་སྐྱུགས་སོང།
དེ་སྐྱུགས་མཁན་ཚང་མ་དེ་ཇོ་མོས་བཏང་མཁན་ནི་ཟས་ངན་ཡིན་པས། ས་དོ་
གོམས་ཤིག་གནམལ་སོང། གནཔ་ཧོ་གོམས་ཤིག་ས་ལ་བབས་སོང། དེ་ནས་
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཡང་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར11
ངའི་བྱ་ཀུན་གྱིས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
བྱ་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དཀར་མོས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
གླིང་གི་ཤ་སྙིང་མར་སྙིང་བདེ་མོ་ཡོད་ད།
ཕིང་དཀར་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་གསོན་ཤ་དེ་ཟོ།
དེ་ཀན་བདེ་མོ་ལ་མེད་ཟེར་ན།
ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་ཤི་ཤ་དེ་ཟོ་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། བྱ་ཀུན་ཡང་ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་ཤི་ཤ་དེ་ཟོས།
དེ་ནས་ཀི་སར་ཡང་མུན་ཏེ་ས་ལ་འགྱེལ་སོང་། བུ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཡང་ཁའི་ནང་
བྱ་སྐྱུག་རེ་བཏངས། ཡང་ཁམ་ལོག་ཚོར་དེ་ཀེ་སར་སྐྱུགས་པ། ཡང་ཟས་ངན་
སྐྱག་སྟེ། ས་དོ་གོམ་ཞིག་གནམ་ལ་ཁྱེརས། གནམ་ཏོ་གོམ་ཞིག་ས་ལ་ཕབས་
སོང། དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
ངའི་བྱ་དེས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
བྱ་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དཀར་མོས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
ངའི་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མི་བདེ་མོ་ལ་ཡོད་ཟེར་ན།

229
ཕིང་དཀར་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་གསོན་ཤ་དུ་ཟོ།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་བདེ་མོ་ལ་མེད་ཟེར་ན།
ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་ཤི་ཤ་དེ་ཟོ་ལེ་
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། བྱ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་ཤིཤ་དེ་ཟོས་པ།
ཀེ་སར་ཡང་མུན་སོང་བས། བྱ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཡང་ཀེ་སར་རི་ཁའི་ནང་བྱ་རྒྱུག་
རེ་བཏངས་སོང་། ཡང་ཟས་ངན་ཚང་མ་སྐྱུགས་པས། ས་དོ་གོམ་ཞིག་གནམ་
ལ་སོང༌། གནམ་དོ་གོམོ་ཟམ་ཞིག་ས་ལ་ཕབས་སོང ། ཡང་ཀེ་སར་ཀྱིས་བླ་
ཞིག་བཏངས །
ངའི་བྱ་གཉིས་ཀ་དངོས་ལ་ཉེན་ལོ།
བྱ་ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དཀར་མོས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བལྟན་བདེ་མོ་ཡོད་ན།
ཕིང་དཀར་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་གསོན་ཤ་དེ་ཟོ་ལོ །
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་བདེ་མོ་མེད་ན།
ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་ཤི་ཤ་དེ་ཟོ་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། བྱ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཕིང་ནག་ལ་རེ་སྟེ་ཤི་ཤ་དེ་ཟོསཔ།
ཀི་སར་ཡང་མུན་སོང། ཡང་ཁའི་ནང་དུ་བྱ་རྐྱག་རེ་བཏངས་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཡང་
ཟས་ངན་ཚང་མ་སྐྱགས་པ། ས་ཧོ་གོམ་ཟམ་ཞིག་གནམ་ལ་སོང། གནམ་དོ་གོམ་
ཟིམ་ཞིག་ས་ལ་བབས་སོང། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་ཟས་ངན་ཚང་མ་བིང་ཚར་དེ་ན།
བྱ་ཀུན་གྱིས་ཡི་གེ་དེ་ཕིང་སྡེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གྱིས་ཡི་གེ་དེ་

280
གསིལ་ཏེ། ཚང་མ་ཧ་གོ་སྟེ་ཛོ་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་མོ་ངའི་རྟ་དེ་གར་ཡོད་ཟེརས།
ཇོ་མོས་ཅི་ཤེ། ཁྱོ་རང་ང་རྟ་ལྕོག་པོ་འདུག། ང་ལ་ཕྲུ་བཏུངས། སོ་བཏབས།
དེ་ནས་རི་ལ་རྒྱབས་བདུངས་པིན་ཟེརས།}
Na, 6.
ཀེ་སར་ཐ་རུ་བཙལ་བ་རི་ལ་སོང་བས། ཀཱི་སར་རི་མཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་ལ་
བགླེབ་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ་སང། ལོ་གཅིག་སོང་མ་ཁན་ནི་ཤི་ལོང་ཞིག་དང་ཐུག་སོང།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་སོང་བ་སང། ཟླ་བ་དག་སོང་མཁན་ནི་ཤི་ལང་ཞིག་དང་ཐོག་སོང་།
ཡང་སོང་བ། ཟླ་གཉིས་སོང་མཁན་ནི་ཤི་ལང་དང་ཐག། དེ་ཟུག་ལ་ལྟ་འིན་
ཞིག་སོང་བ། ཐུ་རུ་གངས་དང་གཡའི་མཚམས་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཚིག་
མིག་རེ་ལ་སྒལ་མིག་རེ་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཧྥ་རུ་མཐོང་སྟེ་
འཐད་དེ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་སོ །།
ངའི་ཐུ་རུས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཀྱང་གོད་དབྱེད་པས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་འདོམ་པ་རིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
གླིང་ཡུལ་གཞུང་ལ་ཧོར་དམག་རིག་ཡོངས་དོག།
གླིང་གི་ཤ་སྙིང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟོས་ཏོག།
གླིང་གི་མར་སྙིང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟོས་ཏོག།
གླིང་གི་ཟན་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཟོས།
ཨ་མ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་ཧོར་གུར་དཀར་གྱིས་ཁྱེར་ཏོག །

231
དུང་གི་སྐྱིད་བུ་དེ་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཁྱེར་ཏོག།
གསེར་ཉ་དུང་ཉ་ཚང་མ་ཡང་ཁྱེརས་ལོ །
རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་ཡང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཁྱེརས་ལོ།
ཕོ་ལད་ཀྱི་གྱོད་གཞུ་དེ་ཡང་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཁྱེརས།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ཧོར་གྱིས་མདའ་མཉམ་བསད་ཏོག།
ཨང་གར་ལྕངས་པ་དེ་བཅོན་ལ་ཁྱེར་ཏོག།
གླིང་མཁར་ཚང་མ་ཤལ་མ་གྱུར་དོག།
ང་ཏང་གཉིས་ཀ་ཧོར་ལ་ཀ་ལ་ལ་ཆེན་ལོ །
རྡ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་གུར་དཀར་ལ་ཀ་ལེ་ལ་ཆེན་ལོ ། །
འཁྱུད་ན་ཧོར་ལ་ཀ་ལེ་སློག་ཡིན་ལ
མ་འཁྱུད་ན་གླིང་པའི་གཡོག་པོ་ཞིག་བཅོ་ཡིན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། ཐུ་རུ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ལན་དུ་ཡང་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
ཁྱོད་གླིང་རྗེད་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
རྣ་མཆོག་མེད་པའི་བོང་བུས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ །
རུ་བ་མེད་པའི་གླང་ངུས་ང་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
གླིང་མཁར་ཤལ་མ་སྒྱུར་བ་ཁྱོད་ལ་དག་ས་ཆོར་ར །
ཤ་སྙིང་མར་སྙིང་ཚར་བ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ད་ཚོར་འདུག་ག།
དང་གི་སྐྱིད་བུ་འཁྱེར་བ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ད་ཤེས་འདུག་ག།
གསེར་ཉ་དུང་ཉ་འཁྱེར་ཅེས་དེ་དག་ས་ཆོར་འདུག་ག།

282
ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མཧོར་གྱིས་འཁྱེར་བ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ད་ཤེས་འདུག་ག།
རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་འཁྱེར་བ་ད་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཤེས་འདུག་ག།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་བསད་ཅེས་ད་ཤེས་འདུག་ག།
ཨང་གར་ལུངས་པ་བཅོན་ལ་འཁྱེར་ཅེས་ད་ཤེས་འདུག་ག།
ཐུ་རུ་ངའི་ཡིད་དུ་ད་ཡོང་འདུག་ག།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་ངའི་ཁ་བར་ད་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཡོང་འདུག་ག།
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ཇོ་མོས་ང་ནང་ལ་ཆ་ན་ཤིང་ཁར་བརྒྱུ་བཀལས།
ང་ཡི་སྟ་ལ་ཕིང་ན་ཐལ་ཁར་བརྒྱ་བཀལས།
ང་ནང་དུ་ཆ་ན་མུལ་ཁྲུག་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་བཏངས།
ང་ཡི་སྟ་ལ་ཡོང་ཟ་ན་རྡོང་ཚོང་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་བཏངས།
ཚིག་མིག་རེ་ལ་སྒལ་མིག་རེ་འབུད་སོང་།
རང་སྲོག་འཁར་དེ་ང་འདིར་ཤོར་དེ་ཡོངས་ཡིན།
ང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་འགྲོ་བ་དེ་ཉན་ཅེས་མེད་ལོ།
པའི་ཁ་ཁྱེད་རང་ཞོན་པ་ཉན་ཅེས་མེད་ལོ །
ཁྱེད་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་ནའང་སོང་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་ནའང་སོང་ལོ།
གི་རུས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་ཡམ་ཚན་ཞིག་སོང་སྟེ། ཡང་ཁ་
འཇམ་པོ་ཀོལ་དེ་ཐུ་རུ་ལ་ཟེརས།།

233
ངའི་ཐུ་རུས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང་།
ལྷ་རྟ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་ཀྱིས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
བདེན་ད་ཐུ་རུ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་བདེན་ལོ། །
འདི་རིང་ང་ལ་འདོམ་པ་ཞིག་ཡོད།
རྟ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་བྱེས་ལ་ཆེན་ལོ །
ང་དང་གཉིས་ཀ་རང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆེན།
ཐུ་རུ་འབབ་སྟེ་སྐྱོད་འང་ཐུ་རུ་ལེ།
ལྷ་རྟ་འབབ་སྟེ་སྐྱོད་འང་རྐྱང་རྒོད་ལེ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཐ་རུས་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཚོར་དེ། བ་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་
གྱི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ། གུ་རུའི་ཚིག་མིག་ པ་སྒལ་མིག་རེ་བིང་སྟེ།
ཁྲག་དང་ཆུ་གསེར་བིང་ངེན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་དང་གྲུ་རུ་གཉིས་ཀ་
མང་པོ་ངུས་པས། ཐུ་རུས། ཀེ་སར་ལེ། ང་ཏང་གཉིས་ཀ་ངུ་ཞིན་ཞིག་འདུག་
སྟེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་མི་བསླེབ། ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལཡང་མི་བསླེབ། ང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ནས་
ཡོང་ཟ་ན། ངའི་ཨ་མ་འབྲུ་གུ་མས་བཀལ་མཁན་ནི་སྐལ་སྨན་རྣ་མཆོག་གཡས་
པའི་ནང་ཡོད། གསེར་དང་དངུལ་གྱི་རྩ་གུ་དེ་རྣ་མཆོག་གཡོན་པའི་ནང་དུ་ཡོད།
དེ་ཕིང་སྟེ་རྩ་གུ་དང་ངའི་ཤུལ་པ་དྲོས། སྨན་དེ་དོབ་ཟེར་ཏེ་བསླབས་པ། ཀེ་སར་
གྱིས་རྣ་མཆོག་ལ་བལྟས་པ་སང། སྨན་དང་རྩི་གུ་ཡོད་ཚུག! དེ་ཕིང་སྟེ་སྒལ་
པ་ཚང་མ་རྩ་ག་དང་དྲས་བཏངས། སྨན་བཏབས་པ། གུ་རུ་སྔོན་མའི་སང་རྡུལ་
བ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་མང་པོ་འཐད་གྱིན་ཞིག་གྲབས་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཐ་རུས་
ཟེརས། རྒྱལ་པོ་ལེ། ང་ཏང་ཇོ་མོའི་རྩ་བསླབ་པ་སང། ཇོ་མོས་ངའི་ཕི་ལ་
B()

༧34
མར་ཟན་ཞིག་གཡོ་སྟེ་འཁྱོང་ཡིན། དེའི་ནང་དུ་བཅུག་ཅིག་བཏབ་སྟེ་ཡོང་ཡིན།
དེ་བོ་ལ་ངས་ལག་མཐོ་བཏང་སྟེ། བཅག་ཡིན། ཁོས་ང་ལ་རྡུང་ཡིན། ཉེ་རང་
གིས་རྡུང་མ་བཅུག་ལེ་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཁོང་དུ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་ཁང་པ་ལ་སོངས་པ། ཁོང་
ཁང་པ་ལ་བསླེབ་མ་ཐག་ཏུ། ཇོ་མོས་ཐ་རུ་ལ་མར་ཟན་གཡོ་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས།
ཐུ་རུས་ལག་མཐོ་བཏང་སྟེ་ལྷ་རུ་བཅག་སྟེ་བཏངས། མར་ཟན་ས་ལ་འབོ་སྟེ་
སོང་བ། ས་ཚང་མ་གནམ་ལ་འཁུར་དེ་ཁྱེརས། ཇོ་མོའི་བསམ་པའི་ནང་དུ་
འདི་ཟུག་ཡོད་པ། ཐུ་རུ་ལ་བཏུག་ཅིག་བཏང་སྟེ་ཤི་བཅུག་ཡིན། ཐུ་རུ་ཤི་ན་ཀེ་
སར་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་མི ཐབ་བསམ་པས། མར་ཟན་དེ་འཕོས་བཏིངས་པ།
ཇོ་མོ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། རུ་ལ་རྡུང་བ་གདུང་མ་ཞིག་འཁུར་ཏེ་ཡོངས་བ། ཀེ་སར་
གྱིས་ཟུམ་སྟེ་རྡུང་མ་བཅུ་གས།།
དི་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་ཅེས་སོང་བས། ཇོ་མོ་དང་བུ་མོ་གཉིས་
ཀས་ང་ཞུ་ཡང་མཉམ་པོ་ཆ་ཡིན་ཟེར་དེ་འབྲངས། ཇོ་མོས་ཀེ་སར་ལ། བུ་མོ་
དེ་རྟམ་ཕོངས་ལ་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ངའི་རྡའི་ཁ་བུ་མོ་སུ་ཡང་ཞོན་ཆ་
མེན་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་པ། ཇོ་མོ་དང་བུ་མོ་གཉིས་ཀ་འབྲང་
སྟེ་སོང། ཆུ་རབས་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་པས། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས།
ཇེ་མོ་རང་དང་བུ་མོ་གཉིས་ཀས་རྟའི་རྔ་མ་ལ་འཐུམ་སྟེ་ཡོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་མོ་
ཡིད་ཆེས་ཏེ་རྟའི་རྔ་མ་ལ་འཐམས། བུ་མོས་ཨ་མ་ལ་འཐམ་སྟེ་སོང། དེ་ནས་
ཆུའི་ནང་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་སང། བླ་རུས་ཕྲ་ཞིག་བཏང་སྟེ་ན། ཆུའི་ཚུར་ཀ་ལ་ཕབ་
སྡེ་བཏངས། ཀི་སར་དང་གླུ་རུ་ཕར་ཀ་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་མོ་ལ་ཁྲག་
རླུང་ཆེན་མོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། རང་གི་བུ་མོ་ལེན་དེ་ཁག་པོ་གཉིས་བརྩེ་སྟེ་ན་ཟེརས།

235
ཁྱེད་ཨ་བ་ཡིན་པ་སང་སྟོད་པོ་ཟོ། ང་ཨ་མ་ཡིན་པ་སང་སྤྱད་དེ་ཟའིན་ཟེར་ཏེ།
བུ་མོའི་སྡོད་པོ་ཕར་ཀཱ་ལ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་བཏངས། སྨད་དེ་ཁོ་རང་གིས་ཟོས།
དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་སྟོད་པོ་མེ་ལ་བསྲེག་སྟེ་མཆོད་རྟེན་ཞིག་བཅོས་པ། ཇོ་མོས་
ང་རང་མི་འཁྱེར་ཅེས་ཡིན་ནོག་བསམ་སྟེ་ཀུ་ཅོ་ ཞིག་བཏངས་པ། མི་ཡུལ་ལི་ཀེ་
སར་ལ་ཁྲེལ་མེས་མི་འདུག། ལྔ་བདུད་ཁྱ་བ་ལག་རིངས་ཟེར་ཏེ། བདད་ཀྱི་རོམ་
ཁང་གི་ནང་ན་ཀུ་ སོ་བཏང་སྟེ་ས་འགུལ་ཡོང་བ་མཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་ཞིག་
བཏངས། དེ་ནས ༑ སར་གྱིས་བསམ། དེ་བདད་པོ་ལངས་ཏེ་ཡོང་ཡིན་འགྲོ་
བསམ་སྟེ། ཇོ་མོ་ལ་མཐོང་མ་བཅུག་པར། རྡ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་རིབ་ཤིང་གོན་ཏེ་
ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་བདད་ཀྱི་རོམ་ཁང་ལ་སྔགས་བརྒྱབ་སྟེ། སྟེང་ན་བིང་མི་ཉན་ཅེས་
བཅོ་སྟེ་ན། ཁོང་རྡ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང།།
*.. 7.
དེ་ནས་གླིང་ཡུལ་དང་ཧོར་ཡུལ་གཉིས་ཀའི་ལམ་འབྱེ་རུ་བསླེབ་སོང།
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་གུ་རུ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།། ་
ངའི་ཐུ་རུས་འང་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
གྲྭ་རུ་ཉེ་རང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ །
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆ་ཡིན་ལོ།
གྲྭ་རུ་ཉེ་རང་གནམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོས་མ་ཆ་ལོ།
གནམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོས་ཆ་ན་ཉི་མའི་ཉི་གཟེར་འཕོག་ཆེན།

23;
གྲྭ་རུ་ཉེ་རང་གངས་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོས་མ་ཆ།
གངས་སྟོད་ཀྱིས་ཆ་ན་སེང་གེའི་སོ་གཟུག་ཡིན།
གྲྭ་རུ་ཉེ་རང་བྲག་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོས་མ་ཆ།
བྲག་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོས་ཆ་ན་སྐྱིན་ཆེན་གྱི་རུ་ཅོ་འཕོག་ཡིན།
གྲྭ་རུ་ཉེ་རང་ཐང་སྟོད་ཀྱིས་མ་ཆ་ལོ།
ཐང་སྟོད་ཀྱིས་ཆ་ན་སྤྱང་ཁའི་སོ་གཟུག་ཡིན།
ཐ་རུ་མཚོམ་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོས་མ་ཆེ་ལོ།
མཆོམ་སྟོད་ཀྱིས་ཚེ་ན་ཉ་མོའི་ཤོག་པ་འཕོག་ཡིན།
ཁྱི་གཅིག་མི་གཅིག་དང་མ་ཐུག་པ་དུང་གི་བྲེས་ལ་སོང།
མཚན་ཐུན་གཅིག་ལ་ཉེ་རང་སླེབ་པ་སོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་བསླབ་སྡེ་བཏངས་པ། ཐུ་རུས་བསླབས་མཁན་ནང་
བུ་རུ་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་དུང་གི་བྲེས་མི་རྩ་ན་གནམ་མ་
ལྟར་ལ་ཡོངས། 
ལ་ངེས་པ་སྐད་ཅིག་བཏངས། གླིང་མཁར་སྲུང་མཁན་ནི་ཨ་བི་ཞིག་དང་ཚ་བོ་ཞིག་
ཡོད་ཚུག་པས། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་རྟ་སྐད་ཚོར་མ་ཐག་ཏུ། དཔལ་ལའི་རྩ་སོང་སྟེ།
ཤེད་དང་ཀུ་ཅོ་བཏང་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
ཝ་གླིང་གི་དཔལ་ལེ་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་གླིང་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་རྟ་སྐད་ཅིག་ཆོར་ལོ།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པའི་སྐད་ཅིག་རང་ཚོར་ལོ

237
མི་དེ་མ་བསླེབ་རྡོ་དེ་བསླེབ་སོང།
ཀེ་སར་མ་བསླེབ་གྲྭ་རུ་བསླེབ་སོང།
འདི་རིང་ཉི་མ་སྤུན་བདུན་ཤུར་ཡིན།
གངས་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ན་སེང་གེ་འགྲུལ་ཡིན།
བྲག་སྟོད་ན་སྐྱོན་ཆེན་འགྲུལ་ཡིན་ལོ །
སྤང་སྟོད་མཐོན་པོ་ན་འབྲོང་ཆེན་འགྲུལ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཐང་སྟོད་ན་སྤྱང་ཁུ་དུ་བ་ལ་ཆོར་ལོ།
ལུང་པའི་མདོ་ན་ལྔ་མོ་ངུ་བ་ལ་ཆོར་ལོ །
མཚོམ་སྟོད་ན་ཉ་མོ་འགྲུལ་བ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
ལུང་ཕྲན་ན་ཆུ་ཕྲན་འགྲུལ་བ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
བྱ་ཕྲན་གྱི་སྐད་བྱེ་བ་ཞིག་ཚོར་ལོ།
རི་རྩ་མེད་ལ་རྩ་ཞིག་སྐྱེ་བ་ལ་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཤིང་ཐོག་སྐམ་པོ་ལ་ཁོལ་སྐྱེ་བ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ཕྱག་བྲིས་བསླེབ་པ་མཐོང།
དཔལ་ལེ་ཉེ་རང་སྡུག་ལ་མ་འདུག་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། དཔལ་ལེ་ནང་ནས་མགྱོགས་པ་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་
བལྟས་པ། དུང་གི་བྲེས་ལ་ཐུ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེས་དང་
གི་བྲོས་བསྡུ་སྟེ་བདེ་མོ་བཅོས། གླིང་པའི་མི་ཚང་མ་མང་པོ་འཐད་གྱིན་ཞིག་
ཐུ་རུའི་གླུ་ཚང་མ་སྦྱིན་རླབས་ལ་མགོ འི་ཁ་བཏག་སྟེ་བོརས། དེ་ནས་བླ་རུའི་སའི་
མདུན་གྲྭའི་ཁ་ཡི་གེ་བྲིས་དེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ཡི་གེ་ཀླུ་མོ་དར་གྱི་གོ་ཆོད་མ་ལེན་བ།

238
གསིལ་ཅེས་སུ་ལ་ཡང་མི་ཤེས་པས། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེ་ཀླུ་མོ་ལ་བོས་པ།
མཚོ་མོའི་འགྲམ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
མཚོའི་དཀྱིལ་ན་ཀླུ་མོས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
ཀླུ་མོ་དར་གྱི་གོ་ཆོད་མས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་གི་ཞག་ལ་སྐད་བཟངས་ཤིག་ཚོར།
གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་ཁ་བར་ཞིག་ཆོར་ལོ།
གུ་རུ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་ལོ།
ཐུ་རུའི་མདུན་གྲུའི་ཁ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ཡི་གེ་ཞིག་འདུག།
དེ་ཡི་གེ་གསིལ་མཁན་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
དེ་ཡི་གེ་གསིལ་བ་སྐྱོད་རོགས་མཛོད་ལོ །
འོབ་རྒྱལ་མེད་པ་སྐྱོད་ཀླུ་མོ་མཁྱེན་ནོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀླུ་མོ་ལ་ཡིད་མ་ཆེས་པར། སྲོ་བཙོ་སྡེ་ལན་དུ་
གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།1
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོས་འང་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
དཔལ་ལ་རྒོད་པོས་བདག་ཅིག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱོད་དེ་ལོ་མང་པོ་སོང།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྟོར་ཏེ་ལོ་འདི་ཟམ་སོང།
ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ག་ན་འདུག་ལོ།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ག་ན་འདུག་ལོ།

28a
ཁྱོད་གཉིད་མ་ལོགས་པའི་སློབ་ལོ་མེན་ན།
ཁྱོད་ཆང་མ་འཐུངས་པའི་ར་རོས་ཤིག་མེན་ན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང། དཔལ་ལེ་ལ་ཡང་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། རུ་ཅོ་ ཞིག་
གི་ནང་དུ་བདུག་སྨན་མང་པོ་རྒྱུང་སྟེ། མཚོའི་ནང་བཏབས་པ། མཚོ་ཚང་མ་
དྲག་པོ་འགུལ་དེ། ཀླུ་མོ འི་ཁང་པ་ཞིག་ཅེས་ལ་ཐག་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཀླུ་མོ་
འཇིགས་དེ་མཚོའི་ནང་ནས་ཕི་སྟ་རུ་བིང་སྡེ་ཡོང་སྟེ། དཔལ་ལེ་འཁྲིད་དེ་མཚོའི་
ནང་ཁང་པ་ལ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ། ཟོ་ཆེས་ཞིམ་པོ་བཏང་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། དཔལ་ལེ་ལེ།
ཉེ་རང་སྔོན་ལ་འགྲུལ། ང་ཡང་མགྱོགས་པ་ཡོང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། དཔལ་ལེས་
གྱོལ་ཟེར་དེ་སྔོན་ལ་ཡོངས། ཞུག་གཅིག་གི་རྟིང་ན་ཀླུ་མོ་ཡང་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་
ཀླུ་མོས་སྒའི་ཡི་གེ་འཁར་ཏེ། དུས་སུ་རུ་ཟེར་བའི་རི་མཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག།
ད་རིའི་ཁ་ན། སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ། བར་བཙན་ཡུལ། འོག་ཀླུ་ཡུལ། ཚང་མ་མཐོང་
ངད་ཚུག། དེའི་ཁ་ཡི་གེ་དེ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ། ཀླུ་མོས་ཤེད་དང་སྐད་ཆེན་པོ་བཏོན་ནས།
ཡི་གེ་གསིལ་གྱིན་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
སྡང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་གྱི་ལྷ་དམག་དེ་དམག་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ ། །
ལྷ་དམག་གི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
བར་བཙན་ཡུལ་གྱི་བཙན་དམག་དེ་དམག་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
བཙན་དམག་གི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབ་བདུན་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
འོག་ཀླུའི་ཀླུ་དམག་དེ་དམག་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
ཀླུ་དམག་གི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྗོགས་པོ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།

240
གླིང་དཔའ་བོ འི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་སྐྱོད་ལོ །
གླིང་གི་བུ་མོ འི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་དཔལ་མའི་ཨ་སྟག་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་བླ་མའི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་སློབ་དཔོན་རྩེ་དགུ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་མོན་དམག་གི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་པེ་ནག་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་མགར་བའི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་ཀ་རོག་ཡང་འཛིན་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་བེ་དའི་དམག་མགོ་ལ་བེ་ད་ཀོང་རིངས་སྐྱོད་ལོ ། །
བུ་ཚ་དབྱུག་རྡོ་བ་སྐོར་ཁྱུད་དམག་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ།
བུ་མོ་འཕང་འཁུར་ཁྱད་དམག་ལ་སྐྱོད་ལོ། །
རང་རྒྱུགས་ཡོད་མཁན་གྱིས་རང་རྒྱགས་འཁུར་དེ་ཡོང།
རང་རྒྱུགས་མེད་ན་གླིང་མཁར་ནས་འཁར་ཏེ་ཁྱོང།
རང་རྟ་ཡོད་མཁན་གྱིས་རང་རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་ཡོང།
རང་རྡ་མེད་མཁན་གྱིས་མཁར་གྱི་རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་ཡོང།
ཁྱེད་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་ཡོང་ལོ།
ང་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་སྔོན་ལ་ཆེན་ལོ །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཡི་གེ་གསིལ་དེ་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཧ་གོ་བཅུགས་ནས།
ཀླུ་མོ་ལོག་སྟེ་མཚོའི་ནང་དུ་སོང། ཐུ་རུ་ཡང་ལོག་སྟེ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་རྩར་སོང།
དེ་ནས་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ། བར་བཙན་ཡུལ། འོག་ཀླུ་ཡུལ། གླིང་ཡུལ་ཚང་མ་ལ་
སྟོང་ཕྲག་མང་པོ་འཛོམ་སྟེ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང།
དམག་བསྐུལ་བཏང་སྟེ། 
ཞག་བདུན་འགྲུལ་དེ་ན། ཨ་ན་ེབཀུར་དམན་མོས་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཟེརས།

༡4
ལྔ་བསམ་མེད་ཀེ་སར་འདི་ཟམ་དམག་མང་པོ་འཁྱེར་ཏེ་ཧོར་བསད་པ་མི་ཉན།
དམག་ཚང་མ་སློབ་སྟེ་ཏོང། ཁྱེད་རང་གཅིག་པོས་ཐབས་བཅོ་སྟེ་སོང་སྟེ་ཧོར་
སོད་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དམག་ཚང་མ་ལོག་སྟེ་བཏངས། ཨ་ག་ཁྲའི་
ཐུང་ལ་ཐུགས་འཁུར་བ་འགྲུལ་ཟེརས། ཨ་གུ་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་རྒྱལ་
ལ་མ་བལྟས་པས། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་མདའ་འཕོག་ཟ་ན།
ཐབས་མ་བཅོ་བ་ཤེད་དང་འཕུད་བཏངས་པའི་ཕ་ལ། འབུ་དམར་ལམ་ངསྟན་ཤི་
བཙུགས། ཁོ་རང་གིས་ཏི་པི་གསུམ་གནས། ཕྱི་ལ་ཀློག་དམར་གསུམ་
བཏགས། རྡོ་ལ་དྲིབ་ཤིལ་གསུམ་བཏགས། དེ་ཚང་མ་མིའི་ཕི་ལ་བཏབས་
ཟེར་ན། གཅིག་ནི་རང་གི་ཐོབ་ཡིན། གཅིག་ནི་ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མེ་ལྡེམ་མཁར་ཐོ་
པའི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ལ་ཡིན། གཅིག་ནི་ཀེ་སར་བདད་ཡུལ་ལ་སྟོར་བའི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་
ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། དེའི་ཕི་ལ་རྒྱགས་ཁལ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་
བཀལ་ཏེ་ཁྱེརས། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས། ཁོ་པལ་ཅེས་སི་ཕི་ལ་བྱེ་མའི་ལམ་
ནས་འགྲུལ་བཅུགས། ཞག་བདུན་འགྲུལ་ཏེ་ན། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་སྐྱོན་བཅོ་སྟེ་
ཟེརས། ཀེ་སར་ལེ། ངའི་གྲོད་པ་ལ་ཟུར་མོ་ཡོང་ང་རག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་
གྱིས་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་ལ་སྔར་བཏངས། ཁྲའི་ཐང་གིས། དེ་སྲིད་ལ་སྔར་བཏང་སྟེ་
ཅི་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཚ་བོ་ཟེརས། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས། ཨ་ག་རང་བ་གྲོད་པལ་ར་མོ་ཡོང་
ན་སྟར་ཁ་བཏང་ཡིན་རྗེརས་པ། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་ལ་གྲྭ་ཆེན་མོ་མཐོང་སྟེ་འཇིགས་ཏེ།
ངའི་ཟུར་མོ་ཕན་ཚར་ཚ་བོ་ལེ་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཡང་སོང་བ། ལ་མཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་
གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང་བས། ཡང་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་བརྙེས་སྐྱོན་བཙོ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ངའི་
མགོ་ལ་ཟུར་མོ་ཡོང་ང་རག་ཚ་བོ་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དཔའ་རྟུལ་ཁྲོད་ཅིག་
81

44a
བཙོ་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས། ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གིས་ཟེརས། དེ་དཔའ་དང་ཅི་བཙོ་ཡི་ཚ་བོ་ཟེརས།
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས། ཨ་ག་རང་གི་མགོ་ལ་ཟུར་མོ་ཡོང་ན། མགོའི་ཁ་མེ་ཞིག་
བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཡང་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་འཇིགས་ཏེ་ད་ཟུར་མོ་ཕན་དུ་མི་རབ་ཚ་བོ་
ལེ་ཟེརས། དེ་ཟུག་གི་ནགས་མང་པོ་བསྟནས་བ་སང། ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་
ལ་སྡིག་པ་ཚོར་དེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཟེརས་བ། zཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ། ཁོ་ལ་ནགས་
བསྟན་ཏེ་ཕན་ཐོགས་ཅི་ཡང་མི་ཡོང། ཁྲུའི་ཐང་ཕྱིར་སློག་ཧོང་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཁྲའི་ཐུང་གི་རྣ་མཆོག་ལ་འཐམ་སྟེ་ན། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སླེབས་ཤིག་
ཟེར་ཏེ་འཕངས་བདྭངས་པ! ཁྲའི་ཐུང་སློབ་ཅིག་ལ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང།།

CAPTURE OF 'ABRUGUMA BY THE KING OF HOR.
ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS.
I.
The King of Hor bad no wife, and therefore sent two wise ravens
to ati comntries to find him a wife. He heard that king Kenar had left
the land of giring and decided to steal 'uBruguna. All the Agus had
gone to the ' coid valley ' for sport. Oply Agu Khrae mgo khrai thung
was in the castle 1 Dera Idommi Idem . He was wearing two late, and
his dog had two red collars. The reason for this was that, according
to his belief, Kexor had got lost, and he himself had become the lord of
gling. Lady '&Bragama had a terrifying dream , in which she saw
herself carried away by water and fire, and Agu 'aBu dwar lum bstan
killed by the king of Hor. When she asked the lot-casting witch about
the meaning of this dream , the witch said that the dream was neither
very good aor very bad, aad went to her own house.
'a Bruguma's maid-servant went to fetch water, and, on the other
shore of the lake, she saw Shankramiru , who was at the head of the army
of Hor. Shankramiru asked the servant to tell him the names of the
strong castle, the hero, the quick horse, the fierce dog, the wise lady,
the paterpal deity, the matornal deity, the sword, the arrow , and the
spear.
The servant was frightened and ran away without making any
reply. 'a Bruguna acolded her for being late, and said she would not
Allow her to walk the steps further, nor to say three words of excuse).
However, she allowed her to say three words, and the servant reported
· what she had been . Now 'aBruguma took the servant's dress and went
away to End out herself. Shankramiru asked her the same questions,
aud 'a Bruguma said : Formerly the strong castle was gLing mkhar,
1 In Kesor's jouriley to Chiga this Agu 1# #baring three bata, and the dog had
three collara. I am informed that Kesar's journey to China ought to be told aftur
the defent of the king of Hor.

244
now it in lDom idemmi Idem mkhar; formerly the hero's name was
Kogar, now it is 'aBu dmar lam bstan ; formerly the quick horse's name
wag skyang rgod dbyerpa, now it is $Ngorog pon pon ; formerly the name
of the fierce dog was ySer ling, now it is the bitch iTom dkar ; for
merly the name of the wise lady a9 ' Bruguma, now it is a Palmai
astag ; formerly the paternal deity's name was Kerzong snyanpo, now it is
Rab lha ; formerly the maternal deity's name was bkur dman rgyalmo, DOR
it is Drag tha rgyalmo; formerly the name of the sbarp word wee
Doba chodma, now it is Mig siri ral gri ; formerly the pame of the swift
arrow was yser mda mjug rings, now it is mda dkarpoi lam bstant. Then
the lady went back to the castle, and Shankramiru to the army of Hor.
The Agos who had come back from the cold valley,' decided in a
couogel that they should go in turns to spy. They lighted fires for each
of them , and said that the fire of him who was to be killed would expire.
At night they all went to the encampment of For and stole all the horses
of the enemy. 'a Budmur lam batan, being a child , was not able to follow
the other Agas, and nothing was left for him but a three-legged horse.
When the light of the next morning appeared, he covered his head with
the ribshing (the invisible cap, Nebelkappe, of German mythology) and
became invisible.
Mpanwijle the two ravens, which bad been sent by the king of Hor
to find him a wife, came back and reported : They had gone to Lhayal;
Banpo rgyabzhin had three daughters ; one of them was damb, the
other blind, and the third deaf. There was neither food for man nor
horse, and the rond bad. Then they had gone to Klu yul; also l Yogspo
bad three daughters, one limping, the other had stiff hands, and the
thiri a big belly, Then they bad gone to Bar btsan ; mother Skyabs bdun
had three danghters, the first had a crooked nose, the second a bala
bead, and the third x long neck. Finally they had gone to gling.
'a Bruguma was benutiful, her upper balf golden, the lower half turquoise,
and her hair golden. Because also supplies for men and hordes conld be
obtained in the gLinz land, and the road wad good, 'a Bruguma would be
& saitable wife for the king of Hor. Kesar was lost in the devil's land,
Aga dPalle had growa old , and the other Agae had gone to the cold
valley ' The ravens had even found a bone and sume beer -yeast for
their food in the land of gLing.
When 'aBu dmar heard the speech of the ravens, he killed them ,
I This is the only incident of borse-stealing in the Tibetan version. The Mongo
Jian version bas do merona otories of this kind; they may be patiopal bistory of the
Mongoliant,
% According to tale No. 7, 'a Bruyuma's hair is black.

245
nging his stick as a bling. The king of Hor, who could not see the Agu,
was astonished to see his ravens fall down from the empty sky. He
baried them , and Agu 'a Bu dmar lam bstan lead his threo-legged steed
before the Ague. Here he was ridiculed so much that he allowed his
three-legged horse, which in reality was the magic horse of the king of
Hor, to ruo back to the encampment of Hor.
Shankramiru mounted the magio horse and rode before the tents of
Aga d Palle and Aga 'aBudmar lam batan . Both Agus frightened him
throagh their ability in shooting. The first shot the middle one of three
flying pigeons so that it fell on Shankramiru's crupper ; the other
destroyed Shankramiru's crupper with an arrow ; because on a day, which
happened to be a Musulman as well as a Tibetan holy day, he was not
willing to fight. Therefore Shankraniru uttered a certain sound, which
made all the stolen horses ran after the magic horse, and in this way
the horses of Hor were recovered.
Because all the Agae were (again ) in the cold valley,' the army of
Hor went first to the gling castle, and then to the castle 1 Dem ldemmi
Idem . Only lady 'a Bruguna and Aga Khrai thung were left. The latter
invited the army to a tonrnament and to enjoy the stores of meat and
batter and lady 'a Bruguma. Then the army of Hor went again to gLing.
(The castle 1 Dem Idemmi ldem is apparently ontside the land of gLing.)
'aBruguma took up arms and tried to fight the army of Hor; but
she was frightened by the war-cry of the enemies who stespected her of
being a woman. She had to sabmit and become the wife of the king of
Hor, but refused to leave her home antil the stores of meat and the
atores of butter were exhanated, and & castle, which by an arrow 's length
peither touched the sky nor the earth, 788 built of sheep-dung. In this
Fay she gained twenty-seven years. 1
When all the conditions were fulfilled, 'a Bruguma gave her dress
to her servant, and the king of Hor went off with the servant, believing
her to be a Bruguma. 'aBrugums remained in the house-stable of g Ling,
biddeo beneatla horae-dung and a copper-kettle. The king of Hor was
advised by an old woman to go back once more to the land of gLing and
have a horse-raca in the stable. At this occasion 'a Bruguma's hair became
entangled with the feet of a horse, and she was discovered and carried
away. Now Aga Khrai thung made a feeble attempt to fight the army
1 According to the Sheh.version, the king of Hor bag to procure a kiang, a wild
yak, Add a wolf, and in this way three years are paired.

246
of Hor. He killed oue hundred men, but was frightened away by the
war.cry, raised by the army. Agu Anggar ltsangspa was carried away
and pat into prison.
* Bu dmar lam bstan, before setting out to fight the army of Hor,
asked Ayn dPallo's advice, in particular, whether it would be better to
the old arms or new ones. Ayu dPale advised him to use old arins,
and to imitate the lion, the fox, and the crow in fighting ; never to go to
the left of a sword -man, nor to the right of a rifle-man. One important
advice he had forgotten to give : never to drink water direct with his
mouth , and never to take off his coat of mail ; for although the body
of 'aBu dmar was of steel, there was a spot of the size of a mirror
ozder bis shoulder which was of Aesh. ' Bu dmar killed half the
army of Hor and re-took 'a Brnguma. When taking her back on
his horse, he was overpowered with sleep, and Shankramiru, who fol.
lowed them , could secretly speak to '2Bruguma, and ask about 'aBu
daar's valuerable spot. 'a Bruguma's heart was inclined in love to the
king of Hor, and sbe advised Shankramiru to ride on in front of them ,
and bide bimaelf in the lower room of a water-mill. When 'aBrugima
arrived there with 'aBu dmar, she persuaded the boy to have a rest,
take off bis coat of mail and drink gome water. The boy who did not
suspect evil, did according to her advice, and, when drinking, was shot
in the fleshy spot by Shanktamiru. Now 'aBruguma and Shankramiru
overpowered him and left him there.!
Soon after Ago dPalle arrived at the mill and resolved to avenge
'a Budmar lam batan. Although the boy implored him to heal him first,
Ago dPalle went off and killed Shantramiru . He filled Shankramiru's
skin with Bago, placed the skin on Shankramiru's horse and sent it off
in the direction of the army of Hor. There this apectacle caused a
great consternation, but the king of Hor end ' Bruguma arrived safely
in the Hor land,
Meanwhile Aga Khrai* thung bad arrived before 'aBu dmar and
tory out the arrow. Because the point of the arrow was barbed, the
beart was torn out too. When Agu dPalle came back, there was no
hope left of saving 'a Bu dint's life ; bat before dying, 'uBu dmar said the
following : la the valleys towards east, ponth, west and north , there are
1 The story of 'a Budmar lam batan is extremely similar to that of Siegfried in
German mythology. The corresponding points are the following : Both 980 a cap
to make themselves invisible; both have a vulnerable spot anderneath the shonlder ;
botb are killed when drinking water and when tired out; in both cases it is a woman
who reveals the valuerable spot to the enemy, although from different motivos.

247
berds of borees, goats, yak-cows, and sheep respectively. In the bal:
conies towards east, south, west, and north, there sre a golden mill, a
bundle of pearle, a copper-dog, and a pearl-white lamb, respectively.
Make three portions of all these articles : one for the restoration of the
gling castle, one for me ('aBu dmar's burial !), and one for king
Kesar. Kenar will come back and re-take 'a Bruguma. This shall be
her punishment: For three yeare lacerne is to be down on her head '; for
three years she is to tend goats ; for three years sheep ; for three years
cattle ; for three years she is to be everybody's servant; and for three
years water-carrier .
Then 'aBu dmar lam batan died , and Agu d Pallo barnt him ou a
high bill. During the time of mourning dPalle would not eat more
than & spoonful of four day.
Aga dpallo was called up by the grand-mother of the end of the
village, who told him to send two storks with a message to Kegar.
After the storks had been fod and washed well, sud practised until
they could fly nine times round the castle of gLing, they were sent off
with a letter ench. The night they spent on the top of a high tree,
at the bottom of which two ogrednes, mother and daughter, bad their
night-qoarters. Towards morning the daughter was sent about to
Bee if anybody was near. As nobody could be seen, the motlier
told the danghter some secrets about Kesar. Kesar was playing at
dice with Bamza bumskyid . He had lost everything and would soon
lose his life in the game; then nobody would be left to hinder the
ogres from eating borse-flesh and haman-flesh. Suddenly the storks
said Kung kung. The mother who know that the birds had listened,
W88 80 angry with the daughter, that she hurled a huge stone at her
head. But the stone rebouuded back and hit wißo the mother. Thus
both died.
When Kesar, who was playing at dice, heard the voice of the
storke, he ran away from the game and said to the birds : If you are
the bringers of good news from the gLing castle, the stores of g Lring,
lady 'a Bruguma and 'abu dmar lam botan , roll about on the white
carpet and eat fresh meat! If not, roll about on the black carpet and
eat the flesh of carcases ! In answer to all questions, the birds went to
the black carpet and ate the desh of carcases. Kenar fainted each
tine, but the birds went on his moath und dropped their excrements
I This is probably one of the few recollections from the time when a Bruguma
was still a personification of tbe earth,

248
in it. Kesar woke up at once and vomited . The advantage of this
treatment was, that all the poisou wbich Bamza bumskyid had given
him , oame out, and full memory was restored to him . The poison
08uBed & plot of ground of the size of a saddle-cloth to fly up to the
sky, and a similar plot of sky to fall to the earth. Kegar asked where
his horse was, and the Dzemo said that it had been sent to the hills on
account of his bed behaviour,
6.
Kosar went to seek his horse and found him dear the ice and
glute. He expressed big wish to start at once, but the horse refused on
200ount of his sore back which weg due to the cruel treatment by
Bamza bumskyid. The horse advised Kegar to make use of the
medicines and lancet put in his ears by mother 'a Bruguma. When
they were applied, the horse booame stronger than ever before.
Because the horse knew before-hand that Bamza bumskyid would
offer him butter with poison, he kaooked the basin out of her hand,
and Kesar hindered the lady wheu she wished to beat the horse with
& bage beam .
Now they rode off; but Bamza bumskyid with ber daughter, whom
she had born to Kesar, ran behind. When riding through a deep
water, Bamza bumakyid seized the horse's tail and followed. The horse
enddeply kicked and threw her and the daughter back to the shore.
Bamza bumskyid was so angry that sbe killed her daughter, and offered
the upper half to Kenar for food. The lower part she devonred herself.
Kesar built a stupa for the upper half.
Bumza bumskyid ran to Khyaba lagrings (the devil's) grave, and
bowled into it. In consequence of this there was an earthquake.
Kosar, making himself invisible, hurried to the grave, aud recited strong
magic spelle, until it was impossible for the devil to leave his grave.
When Keger and the horse arrived at the frontier between gling
and Hor, Kesar sent the horse to gLing, urging it to hasten on, and not
to travel by the sky, nor by the glaciers, nor by high cocks, oor by the
high plain, nor by the lake, to escape from harm which might be caused
by the creatures living there. When the horse was discovered in gLing,
Deighing before his shell-manger, the grand-mother and her grand-daugh
ter cried for Agu dPalle, saying : To-day Kesar's horse arrived, to-day
the sun will rise, on the glacier the lion will walk about, on the rock the
big iber and on the meadow the big yak ; tho wolves were heard howling
on the plain, and the foxes in the valley , in the lake the fishes wore seen

249
moving, in the side-valleys water was seen Howing, the voice of the little
birds was heard ; on the bare hill grans was soen growing, buds were
soon on the dry froit-trees; a letter from kiug Keaur has arrived. Oh
a Palle, do not remain in sadness ! 1
dPulle came and cleaned the manger for the borso ; all people gather
ed some hair of the horse and adorned their heads with it, as a means
of acquiring a blessing.
A letter was found on the fore-part of the saddle, but only the Nagi
Dargyi gochodma was able to read it. When d Palle told her tho joyful
news, she would not believe it. dPalle bad to throw poison into the lake
and with difficulties persuaded lier to come out and read the letter pub
licly. The Nagi went to the top of the hill Tissuru , from whence I Ha
yul, Bar blsan yul and Klu yul could be seen. This letter contained the
general call to arms. The follo ing wore called :
Tlie armies of (Ha yul, Bar utsan yul and Klu yul with their re
spective kings; the Agua of gL , with d Palle at their head ; the lanias
of g Ling with Tse dyu at their ead ; the Mons (caste of carpenters) of
gling with Penag at their heak he smiths of gLing with Kurog yang
'adzin at their head ; the Bheda aste of musicians) of g Ling with r Kang
rings (long-leg) at their head ; e boys skilled in using the sling ; and
the girls skilful in the use of spindle. Whoever had provisions and
a borse, was to use them ; W had done, was to receive them at the
gling castle.
This army bad marched after Kegar for seven days, when suddenly
Ane bkur dmarmo arrived, and told him to dismiss tho host, and to fight
the king of Hor alone. All went back ; only Agu Khrai thuny was
loaded with 18 bushels of provisious as a punishment for his misdeeds,
and had to carry them for Kesar. When he was tired, Kesar would
Bharpen a knife or liglit a fire, to cure him in a rude way. But Anebkur
dmanno did not like the sport and ordered Kegar to send the Agu home
too. Kenar seized liim by his ears and threw him back , so that he arrived
in the gling-land in a moment.
If this song does not refer to the arrival of spriug. I do not know to what clee
Perhaps I shall be cliarged with having forged this song or certain lines in it. But I
hope that somebody will take the trouble and ascertain that this song is actually kuown
to the people of Lower Ladakh.
2 This song is of a special interest, as it appoars to contain the actual ancient
Tibetan call to arms.
32

VOCABULARY AND COMMENTS.
pahallde, name of the king of Hor.
'abyangshes, possessing pure wisdom .
Ž h snyi lam ,=rmi lan, iraam.
mon khanmo, = mo mkh mo, a woman who casts lots.
N ' a 'y chu sna, ma ona, 'the 90 of water and fire '; i.C., the
foremost part of them .
453 phad tse or phad tsa, coarse koloth.
dar yug ; pot parrow stripe, but a large piece of silk
without scam .
al mo rdi, dice for casting lots.
abyi dgos, = 'abyin dgos, what is proper to be offered.
2.
chu 'athunmo, or - 'atbummo ; or— 'athumma, the maid .
servant who fetches water.
ANK ) bsang chu, respectfal for ' water.'
ཆུ་ཀར། ct༤ &ar, pail.
52101HQU81 dpalmai astag, name of a wigo woman of g Ling ;
sho is the female Agu.
59'2 rab 'ha, name of the intermediate paternal deity.

251
5Tahorati drag lha rgyalmo, vamo of the intermediate
maternal deity.
migsiri, Dame of a famous sword.
མདའ་མོ་གསེར་མདའ་མཇུག་རིངས། སྨedia༠ zser md༩ z༡༩༤༡ rigs
* golden arrow , long tail,' name of an arrow .
mda dkarpoi lam bstan, 'whitu way.
loader,' dame of an arrow.
shankramiru, name of the captain of the army of Hor.
TEATR5 , almag rang,=d 
compare Lad.
Grammar, Laws of Sound, No. 3.
ma nonba, not beiog able to follow (lit. press on the peoplo
before him ).
rib shing, in full grib shing (Laws of Sound, No.3), the in
visible cap (Nebelkappo) of Tibet. Who puts it on his head becomes
invisible
FAC , hiling, astonislied, surprised.
5555 handrang, = han lilang, dumb.
g ay xhurba, blind, in West Tibet.
rgud, deaf,
5 ! 
sbangmia, grains of barley that remain in boor,
og ldi, stick to throw stonos with.
w urces, to filg.
mdun gr , fore-part of the saddlo.
g 965 shukur shing sher, name of a Mussulman festival.
FN mangs, = mang, much, many.

252
cra palo, all the hair tied into a single knot.
y zhid mad, or yzhis mad , wife,
kha shus, sereral.
Fiqh 
A5T blag skye, neok-bracelet.
A kha zubla, or kha sbubli turned upside down.
350 | sungs, = zung, a pair.
དུ་བག། ༧
STIGIKI bub chu 'athungcas, drink water ont of a brook,
by bending down to it.
Apa ganni rogebu, a thick coat of mail, made of iron,
chaius.
ubote, putting on the hiod-part of the horse.
hang yyog, below the shoulder.
579999 ran 'athag,=rang 'athag, mill.
24TV phancas, to heal, become well.
oroggi pon pon, black-blue with tassels,' pame
of dPulle's horse.
5769550551 drar chad drur chad, cutting quite through.
garī zhibmo, sandy, of fine sand.
ghina thal sub, or thal thsub, dust,
1 loebscas, jump (especially on a horso )
@ zhig sob, healing from destruction, restoration.

253
28 | rab sul, balcony.
a krugu, ball of yarn.
eug shes, koowing how to bark (of a dog ).
'abrag shes, knowing bow to shear (a sheep ).
mthong kol, slave of the whole community ; i.e., whoso
ever sees her may take her for his work.
thur mangs, = thurma, spoon ,
90
CAST khrung khrung dkarmo, stork ; thus it is appa
rent that also in the Sheh -version , the birde coming from the south are
not birds of prey but storke. They will fit much better in a myth of
the 
SERBODS.
GA* : Il cub cadde, silent.
sibiting, risk of neck or life.
MF 751 kung kung, voice of the storks.
* * *W '5'5 ! arara ururu , rattling of dice.
རེ་ས། *ecas, roll about.
mun sangcas, awake from fainting.
she, = ri shes, who (what) knows
9955**NJ phra btangcas, to kick.
6.
qays shi lang, horse-dung.
T a thrig mig, the depressions between the elevations of
the spine.

25 +
mai kale, rorenge.
kolte, speaking [soft language).
yyocas, cook.
Apsv 
gmtho btangcas, to rear up (of horsos).
urus, perhaps tho same as rdulli , little stone-pot.
'aphocas pour out; causative of 'abuba.
khrag rlung, anger (lit. blood-wind).
"A rom khang, or ro khang, grave.
N g & 1 mthaan thun, perhaps the same as thun mthsams, at day
break.
apyga551 nyima spun bdun, 'tho gan, the seven brothers,' the
nevon Haritas.
ing thog, here in the sense of fruit-tree.'
An khol, bud of leaves .
Kyesar ; it is remarkable that here the form of Kyesar
Actually occurs, instead of Kesar. Many poople in Lower Ladakh
pronounce the bero's name in this way.
dargyi go chodma, name of a klumo; in the Sheh.
version the name of ’uBruguma's handmaid is Dar lha go cruodma.
Na slab lo, speaking as if in a dream .
55N | rgyangcas, to 6.11.
tissurut, name of a hill.
215971 penag, name of the captain of the Mon-arníy .

265
Carog yang 'adzin , name of the captain of the
army of smitus.
Tkang rings, long-leg' ; Dame of the captain of the
Bheda-army.
* **055*IN 1 sdar btangcas, sharpon (a knife).
7 '455*34 | starkha btangcas, to open (a veiu ).
5510 dpă, tinder.
of zhul, a ball of food (to be thrown into the mouth ).

ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཧོར་པ་ཧལ་ལྡེ་བཏུལ་ཅེས་ཀྱི་སྒྲུངས་ནིང་།
No. 1.
༄༅ ། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གཅིག་བོ་ ཅེ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང། ཀི་སར་ཚོར་
མང་གི་ཚོགས་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པའི་ས་ཁྱད་ཅིག་ལ་བསླེབ་པ། ལམ་མ་ཐོབ་པ་
བཀགས་པོ་སོང་ནས། སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་བཏབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། མགར་བ་ཀ་རོག་ཡང་
འཛིན་དང་ཡང་མགར་བ་ཚང་མ་སོལ་བའི་ཕྱི་ལ་སླེབ་ཤིག་ཟེརས་པ། མགར་
བ་ཚང་མ་ཡོང་སྟེ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་སོལ་བ་བསད་དེ་ཁྱེརས་པས་ལམ་ཐོབ་སྟེ་སོང།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་གསེད་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་དང་ཐུག ། དེ་རུ་ཡང་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་
བཏབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཇོ་ཇོའབྲུ་གུ་མའི་འཁོར་ཡོག་ཚང་མའི་ཕང་ཤིང་ལ་གྱུར་
ཅིག་ཟེརས་པ། སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་བུ་མོ་མང་པོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཕང་ཤིང་ལ་ཁྱེར་དེ་མེད་མཁན་
བཅོས། དེ་ནས་ཡང་སོང་པ་སང། མ་ལྕང་གི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་གི་མདུན་ལ་
བསླེབ་སོང། ཡང་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞིག་བཏབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། འདི་མ་ལྕང་ཚང་མ་གླིང་
གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མའི་མདའ་ཤིང་ལ་གྱུར་ཅིག་ཟེརས་པ ། དེ་མཆོགས་ཚང་མ་
ཡང་མེད་མཁན་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཡང་སོང་བ། འུམ་བུའི་ཚོགས་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་
གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང་བས། ཡང་སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། འདི་འུམ་བུ་
ཚང་མ་དཔལ་མོ འི་ཨ་སྟག་གི་མདུང་གི་ཡུ་བ་ལྡན་ཅིག་ཟེརས་པ། སྲིབ་ཅིག་
ལ་མེད་མཁན་སོང། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་ལམ་ཐོབ་སོང་།།
དེ་ནས་སྲར་གྱི་ལའི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང། སྤང་ཏོ་གོམ་ཟམ་ཞིག་
ཡོད་ཚུག། ཐ་རུ་དེའི་ཁ་བཏག་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་རང་ཕུ་ཐངས་གཅིག་ནང་མགོ་

257
བོརས། ཕུ་ཐུངས་གཅིག་ནང༌། རྐང་པ་བོར་ཏེ། གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་འདུགས།
སྟར་གའི་ཁུམ་བུ་གང་གི་འོ་མ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པ། དེ་ངས་འཐུང་སྟེ་ཅི་འགྲངས་ཡིན་
བསམ་སྟེ་མ་འཐུང་བ་འདུགས། རྒྱ་རུས་དེ་སྤང་པོ་མཚན་མོ་རེ་རུ་རུམ་ཅུ་རུམ་
བཅོ་འིན་ཞིག་འདུགས། ་ དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནེ་བཀར་དམན་མོས་ཀེ་སར་སྙིང་ན་
འདུག་ག་མི་འདུག་ཚོད་བལྟ་སྟེ། སྤྱང་ཁ་ངུ་བཅུགས། ལུང་མཇུག་ན་ལྔ་རྩེ་
བརྒྱལ་བཙུགས། གཡའ་མངས་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཤོག་སྒྲ་བིང་བཅུགས། རིལ་མང་
ཚང་མ་ལ་རྐང་ར་བིང་བཅུགས། ཡང་སྐད་སྣ་གསུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་བཅུ་ཕིངས།
སྔོན་ལ་ཀེ་སར་མང་པོ་འཇིགས་སོང། དྷིང་ན་འོ། ཨ་ནེ་བཀར་དམན་མོས་
མཛད་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་འགྲོ་བསམ། ཨ་ནེ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
ཨ་ནེ་བཀུང་དམན་མོ འི་ཚུལ་ནང་མི་ངན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
བཀར་དམན་གྱོལ་མོ འི་ཚུལ་ནང་མི་ངན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ལུང་སྟོད་ན་སྤྱང་ཁ་ཞིག་ངུ་བཅུགས་ལོ །
ལུང་མདོ་ན་ལྔ་ཙ་ཞིག་བརྒྱལ་བཅུགས་ལོ།
རིལ་མང་རྐང་མེད་ཀྱི་རྐང་ར་ཞིག་ཚོར་ལོ།
གཡའ་མངས་ཤོག་མེད་ཀྱི་ཤོག་སྒྲ་ཞིག་ཚོར་ལོ །
ཨ་ནེ་བའི་ཚུལ་ནང་བདུད་སྐད་ཅིག་རག་ལོ།
བཀུར་དམན་མོ འི་ཚུལ་ནང་འདྲེ་སྐད་ཅིག་རག་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་མགོ་ཕིང་སྟེ། བལྟས་པ་སང། ཐུ་རུས་དེ་
སྤང་ཏོ་གོམ་ཟོད་པོ་ཟེ་སྟེ། འགྲང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཀྱང་སྟར་གའི་
ཁོམ་བུ་གང་གི་འོ་མ་དེ་འཐུངས་པ། འགྲངས་དེ་ཡང་དེན་ན་ཟློད་ཅིག་ལས།

258
དེ་ནས་གནམ་ལངས་ཏེ་བལྟས་པ། བྱ་རྗེས་མི་རྗེས་ཅི་ཡང་མེད་ཚུག། སྲར་གྱི་
ལ་དེ་མ་མཐོན་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་པས། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་ལ་སྟོད་
གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
ངའི་ཨ་ནེས་འང་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང།
བཀར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོས་འང་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།
ངའི་ཨ་ནེ་བའི་ཕྱག་ལ་མི་ཉན་ཅེས་ཡང་མེད་ལོ།
བཀུར་དམན་མོའི་ཕྱག་ལ་མི་གྲུབ་ཅེས་ཡང་མེད་ལོ།
སྲར་གྱི་ལའི་ཁ་རུ་སྤྱང་ཁུ་མཇུག་རྡུམ་ཆད་དེ་ལུས་དེ་འདུག།
ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོས་རོགས་ཤིག་རང་མཛད་ལོ །
སྲར་གྱིལའི་སྟེང་ད་ཕོ་རོག་ནག་ཆུང་ཆད་དེ་ལུས་དེ་འདག།
བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོས་ཁོ་ལ་རོགས་ཤིག་རང་མཛད་ལོ།
སྲར་གྱི་ལའི་ཁ་ན་ཅུང་ཁ་ཁ་དམར་མོ་ཆད་དེ་ལུས་དེ་འདུག།
ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོས་ཁོ་ལ་རོགས་ཤིག་མཛད་ལོ།
སྲར་གྱི་ལའི་མཇུག་ན་ཝ་མོ་འཇོལ་ལི་ལུས་ཏེ་འདུག།
བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོས་ཁོ་ལ་རོགས་ཤིག་མཛད་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱི་མདུན་པོ་ལ་ལྔ་ཙེ་ཞིག་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ལྔ་ཙེ་ལ་འདེད་དེ་ཁྱེརས་པ་སང། ཝཙོ་འཁོར་རིན་ཞིག་སོང་བ།
ཀེ་སར་ཡང་རྙིང་རང་ཞོགས་དེ་སོང་བ་ལ་དེ་མགྱོགས་པ་འདྱེལ་སོང།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཞག་བདུན་འགྲུལ་ཏེ་སོང་བ། སྦལ་ལུའི་ལམ་སྲུངས་
ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་རུ་སྦལ་ལུ་གསུམ་གྱིས་མོ་ལ་རྩེ་འིན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། མི་སུ་

250
ཡོང་ན་ལྟ་ཅེས་སི་ཕི་ལ། ཏི་པི་ཞིག་བེར་ཀའི་མགོ་ལ་བོར་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཀེ་སར་
གྱིས་རིབ་ཤིང་གོན་ཏེ་སོང་བ། དི་མི་དེ་ལ་ཀེ་སར་ཡོང་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ་འཁོར་རད་
ཚུག། སྦལ་ལུ་ཀུན་ལ་མ་མཐོང་བ། གེ་སར་ཉེ་མོ་རིག་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་སང།
ཏིཔི་ཐེབ་མང་པོ་འཁོར་བས། སྦལ་ལུས་བལྟས་པ། མི་སུ་ཡང་ཡོང་ཅེས་མ་
མཐོང་བས། སྦལ་ལུ་གཅིག་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ང་ཞེས་ཆོ་ལོ་རྩེ་ཅེས་ལ་ཁྱོ་རང་མ་
འཐད་མཁན་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེར་ཏེ། དི་པི་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་སྟན་ལ་བཏིང་སྟེ་བོརས། དེ་ནས་
སྦལ་ལུའི་མདུན་ལ་ཀེ་སར་བསླེབ་ཚར། དེ་སྦལ་ལུ་ཀན་ཟུམས། སྦལ་ལུ་ཚང་
ཀའཇིགས་ཏེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་སེམས་རྐུ་བཅོས་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
རྒྱ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་དང་ཐུག་པ་དེ་རྒྱུ་མ་ལན་ཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ཕུལ་རྒྱུ་ཞིག་མེད་པ་གདུང་གདུང་རིག་རག་ལོ།
ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་དང་མཇལ་བ་མང་པོ་འཐད་ལོ །
ཕུལ་རྒྱུ་མེད་པ་ནི་སེམས་ཚོར་རིག་རིག་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་ཀེ་སར་ཡང་འཐད་དེ་ཟེརས། ང་ཏང་ཚང་ཀས་ཆོ་
ལོ་ཚེ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་བརྩེས་པས། སྦོལ་མོ་ཁྲོལ་འཛོམ་མོ་ཆོ་ལོ འི་མིག་ནང་དུ་
ཞུགས་ནས། ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཆོ་ལོ་མ་ཡོངས་པས། སྦལ་ལུ་ལ་ཆོ་ལོ་ཡོང་སྟེ།
ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ཟན་ནོར་ཚང་མ་སྦལ་ལུས་ཁྱེརས། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གྱིས་གླིང་མཁར་
བཙུགས། སྦལ་ལུས་སྦལ་ཁང་གྲུ་བཞི་བཙུག་སྟེ་བཏངས་པ། གླིང་མཁར་ཡང་
སྦལ་ལུ་ལ་ཐོབ་སོང། ཡང་གེ་སར་གྱིས་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་བཙུགས། སྦལ་
ལུས་ཡང་རྡ་ཞིག་བཙུག་སྡེ་བཏངས་པ། རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ཡང་སྦལ་ལུ་ལ་ཐོབ།

260
དེ་ང་ན་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་བ་བཙུགས། སྦལ་ལུས་སྦལ་མོ་ལ་ལེ་
མོ་བཙུགས། ཇོ་ཇོ་ཡང་སྦལ་ལུ་ལ་ཐོབ། དེ་ཟུག་ཀ་སར་གྱི་ནོར་ཚང་མ་ནོར་
བུ་རིགས་ཚང་མ་སྦལ་ལུ་ལ་ཐོབ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཅིའང་མ་ལུས་པ་སང། རང་
གི་རྩི་བི་ཏིང་བཙུག་སྟེ་རྩེ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་བརྩེས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནེབཀུར་དམན་ས་
གསེར་སྦྱང་གཅིག་ལ་རྫ་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་གྱི་རྣ་མཆོག་གི་ནང་དུ་སོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ།
ལྔ་སྟངས་ཅན་ནི་སྟངས་མེད། ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ ། གྲོས་ཅན་ནི་གྲོས་མེད་ལྷའི་
བུ་ཀེ་སར། གོང་བའིཁབ་པོ་འཕུད་དེ་རང་གི་ཆོ་ལོ་འི་མིག་དེ་བྲས། སྦལ་
ལུའི་ཆོ་ལོ་བོར་དེ་ཉེ་རང་གི་དུང་ཆོལ་དེ་རྩེས་ཟེརས། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་རང་གི་དུང་
ཆོལ་དེ་ཕིང་སྟེ། གོང་བ་ནས་ཁབ་ཕིང་སྡེ་ཆོ་ལོ འི་མིག་དེ་བྲིས་པ་སང་། སྦལ་
མོ་ཕྲོལ་འཛོམ་དེ་ཚོ་ལོ འི་མིག་ནང་ནས་བིང་སྟེ། ཨོ་ཧོ་ཧོ། ངས་ཤེས་ཡིན་ན་མི་
ཤིས་ཆོད་བལྟས་པ་ཡིན་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་བིང་སྟེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་རྩི་བི་ཏིང་བཙུག་
སྡེ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་དུང་ཚོལ་དེ་བརྩེས་པས། རྫི་བི་ཏིང་དེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཐོབ་སོང༌། དེ་ནས་
སྦལ་ལུཀཱན་ལ་བེར་ཀ་ཚོམ་ཤིང་ཁྲ་སུག་ཅིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། སྦལ་ལུ་ཀུན་གྱིས་ཀེ་
སར་ལ་མགྲོན་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། དེ་ཚོམ་ཤིང་པོ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
སྦལ་ལུ་ངའི་ཚོམ་ཤིང་ཁྱོད་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང་།
ཚོམ་ཤིང་ཁྲུ་སུག་གིས་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་།
དེ་རིང་གེ་སར་ལ་མགྲོན་ཞིག་རིང་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོ་ལ་སྐུ་མགྲོན་ཞིག་ཕུལ་ཡིན།
ཁྱེད་ཆོམ་ཤིང་ཁྲུ་སུག་དེ་རྒྱ་ནག་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
རྒྱ་ནག་ཡུལ་ནས་གོ་ཤེན་འབྲུག་འབྲིས་མ་ཁྱོང་ལོ།

a61
ཚོམ་ཤིང་ཁྱེད་དབུས་གཙང་གཞུང་ལ་སོང་ལོ །
དབུས་གཙང་གཞུང་ནས་ཇ་ལགས་མོ་ཞིག་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
ཆོམ་ཤིང་ཁྱེད་རང་ཡར་ཁྱེན་གཞུང་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ཡར་ཁྱེན་གཞུང་ནས་ཧོར་རྡོ་གྲོང་གྲོང་ཞིག་ཁྱོང་ལོ 1
ཚོམ་ཤིང་ཁྱེ་རང་ལ་དྭགས་གཞུང་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ལ་དྭགས་གཞུང་ནས་ནོར་བུ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
ཚོམ་ཤིང་ཁྱེ་རང་སྦལ་ཏི་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
སྦལ་ཏི་ཡུལ་ནས་གལ་མན་ཕ་དིང་ཁྱོང་ལོ །
ཚོམཤིང་ཁྱེ་རང་བུ་རིག་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
བུ་རིག་ཡུལ་ནས་གྲོ་དཀར་མེན་ཟེ་ཞིག་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
ཚོམ་ཤིང་ཁྱེ་རང་ཁོ་རྒྱལ་གཞུང་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ཁ་ཅུལ་གཞུང་ནས་འབྲས་དཀར་ཨོལ་ལོ་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
དེ་ཚང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་མགྲོན་བཅོ་ཡིན་ལོ །
དེ་ཚང་མ་སྡུས་ཏེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་མགྲོན་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་པ་སང་ཚོམ་ཤིང་དེས། ཟེར་མ་ཐག་དེ་ཚང་མ་དུས་
གཅིག་ལ་ཁྱོངས་པས། དེ་ནས་དེ་ཟུག་མང་པོ་ཡོད་ཅེས་ཤེས་ཏེ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་
གསོལ་མཆོད་གཅིག་བཏང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར །
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ་རྣམས་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་རྣམས་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།

262
ཕ་ལྷ་ཀྱེར་རྫོང་སྙན་པོ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
མ་ལྷ་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
སྟེང་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
བར་བཙན་གྱི་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབ་མདུན་མ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
འོག་ཀླུའི་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྡོག་པོ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ །
དེ་ཟུག་གསོལ་མཆོད་བཏངས་པ་སང་། དེ་ཚང་མ་མེད་མཁན་སོང༌།
དེ་ནས་སྦལ་མོ་ཁྲོལ་ལ་མོས་གེ་སར་ལ་ཀླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།།
གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
ཁྱེད་སྤྲུལ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོས་བདག་ལ་གསན།
གླིང་གི་གླིང་མཁར་འཁར་དེ་ཉིད་ལ་བག་སྲིས་བཙོ་ཡིན།
གུ་རུ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་འཁུར་ཏེ་གེ་སར་ལ་བག་སྲིས་ཟུམ་ཡིན།
ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་འཁར་དེ་ཉིད་ལ་བག་སྲིས་ཟུམ་ཡིན།
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་འཁར་དེ་བག་སྲས་ཤིག་ཟུམ་ཡིན།
གླིང་གི་ནོར་བུ་ཚང་མ་འཁར་ཏེ་གེ་སར་ལ་བག་སྲིས་ཟུམ་ཡིན།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུ་བསིལ་མོ་ཞིག་ཡིན། ཉིད་ཀྱིས་དབུར་ས་འོས།
སྦལ་ཁང་གྲུ་བཞི་གྲོན་མོ་ཡིན། ཉིད་ཀྱིས་དགུན་ས་ཙོས་ལོ།
སྦལ་ལུ་དུང་དང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གཡོག་པོ་དེ་ཅོས་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་པ་སང་། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏུངས་སོ།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དག་དེ་མི་དགོས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱེར་ལོ།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་དེ་མི་དགོས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱེར་ལོ།

a6g
ཇོ༌ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་དེ་མི་དགོས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱེར་ལོ།
ལྡེམ་ལྡེམ་མི་ལྡེམ་མཁར་མི་དགོས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱེར་ལོ །
གླིང་གི་ནོར་བུ་ཚང་མ་མི་དགོས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱེར་ལོ།
དེ་ཚང་མ་ཁྱེད་ལ་ཐོབ་མཁན་གྱི་ནོར་ཡིན།
ངམཐོབ་པའི་ནོར་དེ་ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་རྩི་བ་དིང་དེ་ཡིན།
ང་རང་ལ་ཐོབ་མཁན་ནི་རྩི་བི་ཏིང་ཕེང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། སྦལ་ལུ་མང་པོ་འཇིགས། སྦལ་ལུས་ཡང་ལན་
དུ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་སོ
གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོས་དངོས་ཤིག་ལ་ཉོན་དང་།
1
བྱེད་སྤྲུལ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ 
སྦལ་ལུ་ང་མ་བསད་སྦལ་ལུ་ང་བོར་ན་གྱོལ་ལོ 
དུང་དུང་ང་མ་བསད་དུང་དུང་བཀོལ་ན་རྒྱལ་ལོ
ཀ་སར་ཉིད་ལ་ཕན་ཐོགས་ཤིག་ཡོང་ཡིན་ལོ།
བྲག་ཚ་འུ་དུང་དུང་ལ་སྦལ་ལུ་མེད་ན་མི་ཉན་ལོ
རྡོ་བ་ས་ཕར་ནམ་ཕར་ལ་སྦལ་ལུ་ང་མེད་ན་མི་ཉན་ལོ།
ང་མ་བསད་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཞབ་ཤི་ཞིག་བཙོཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་ཡང་འཐད་སོང་སྟེ། སྦལ་ལུ་དང་གཉིས་
ཀས་གཏམ་ཆད་བཅོ་སྡེ། སྦལ་ལུ་ཀེ་སར་དང་མཉམ་པོ་སོང་།།

264
No. 2,
དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་བྲག་ཚ་འུ་དང་དུང་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང་བ། བྲག་དེ་
ལ་རྡ་སྒོ་ཡོད་ཚུག! རྡ་སྒོ་དེ་ཆུག་སྟེ་མ་ཕྱེས་པས། སྦལ་ལུས་ཟེརས་པ།
ལྔ་བྲག་སྒོ ། སྦལ་ལུ་ང་ཡོང་ཆུག། བྲག་སྒོ་དེ་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་བོར་ཟེརས་པ། བྲག་སྒོ་
དེ་ཕྱེས་པས། 
ཀི་སར་གྱིས་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་མགྱོགས་པ 
སྒོ འི་ནང་
ནས་སོང་བ་སང་། 
བྲག་སྒོ་དེ་ལ་ཀེ་སར་ཡིན་བ་ཤེས་ཏེ་མགྱོགས་པ་ཞིག་སྟེ་
ཡོངས་ནས། ་རུའི་རྔ་མ་བྲག་བར་ནང་དུ་འཁོད་སོང་བས། དེ་ནས་ཧོར་གྱི་
ཕྲུ་གུ་གསེ་རལ་ཅན་དང་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་གཉིས་ཀའི་མགོ་དེ་ཁྱོང་ཆད་བཅོས་པ་
རྟའི་རྔ་མ་དེ་ཕུད་བཏུངས །
དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་སོང་པ་སང༌། རྡོ་བ་ས་ཕར་ནམ་ཕར་དུ་བསླེབ་
སོང༌། 
དེ་རུ་བསླེབ་པ་རྡོ་བ་ཚང་མ་ཕར་གྱིན་སུ་གནམ་ལ་ཚའད་ཚུག། སུ་ས་ལ་
འབུད་ཀྱིན་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་རུ་ཡང་སྦལ་ལུས་ཟེརས། ལྔ་རྡོ་བ་ཚང་མ་སྦལ་ལུ་
ང་ཡོང་ཆུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང་། རྡོ་བ་ཚང་མ་མལ་མལ་ལ་འདུགས།།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་སོང་བས། ཁོང་འབྲོང་ཀ་ར་ཁམ་པའི་
རྩར་བསླེབ། དེ་འབྲོང་ཡང་ཧོར་གྱི་ལམ་པ་ཡིན། དེ་རུ་སྦལ་ལུ་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་
འབྲོང་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ལྷ་འབྲོང་ཀ་ར་ཁམ་པ། ང་ལ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ནག་བསྟན་
འདུག་ཟེར་དེ་ན། སྦལ་ལུ་ཤོར་སོང། 
འབྲོང་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་ཚོར་དེ་མགྱོགས་པ་
ཡོང་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་དང་གླུ་རུ་གཉིས་ཀ་གསོན་ཏེ་ལ་རྨིད་བཏངས། ཀེ་སར་རྣམི་
གཉིས་ཀ་འབྲོང་གི་གྲོད་པའི་ནང་དུ་ཞག་ཁ་ཅིག་ལུས་དེ་འདུགས
། དེ་ནས་ཨ་
ནི་བཀུར་དམན་མོས་ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ལྦ་བསམ་པ་མེད་མཁན་ནི་ཀེ་སར་

265
རྒྱལ་པོ ། 
ཁོ་རང་འབྲོང་གི་གྲོད་པའི་ནང་དུ་ནམ་ཚུག་པ་འདག་ཆེན
། ཁྱོ་རང་
ལ་དག་པ་ཅན་གྲི་ག་མེད་ད 
ཕོ་ལད་དཀར་པོ འི་སྡེབ་ཆུང་མེད་དོ། ཕོ་ལད་
དཀར་པོ འི་སྡེབ་ཆུང་དང་སྡུབ། དུག་པ་ཅན་གྲི་གུག་དང་ཅོད། རྩིབ་ལོག་ཕྱོགས་
ནས་བིང་སྡེ་ཡོང་། 
འབྲོང་གི་སྙིང་དེ་བཅད་དེ་འཁར་ད་ཡོང་
། དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ།
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་གྲོད་པའི་ནང་ནས་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས
ལྔ་འབྲོང་ཆེན་ཀ་ར་ཁམ་པས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ
འབྲོང་གྲོད་སང་གྲོན་མོ་མི་རག་ལ་
འབྲོང་ཤ་བས་སང་ཞིམ་པོ་མི་རག་ལོ །
འདི་རིང་སྐྱིད་སྐྱིད་ཅིག་སྐྱིད་མི་ བ་ལོ།
འདི་རིང་མཆོགས་ས་སྟན་བོལ་མོ་ཐོབ་མི་ཤེས
འདི་རིང་མཚོགས་ས་སྙས་བོལ་མོ་ཞིག་མ་ཐོབ
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་འབྲོང་གི་ནང་ཆ་ཚང་མ་བཅད་ཀྱིན་ཞིག་དང་
འདགས་པ་འབྲོང་དེ་ཤི་སོང་བས། 
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་རྩིབ་མའི་ནང་ནས་དཀར་ཁང་
ཞིག་ཕིང་སྡེ་དུ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་ཕི་སྟ་རུ་བིང་སོང་
དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་སྦལ་ལུ་དེ་
བཙལ་ཏེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ལྔ་སྦལ་ལུ། 
ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་ང་ཞ་རྟ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་འབྲོང་
ལ་ཟ་བཅུགས། ཁྱོད་ལ་ངས་སྣ་ལོ་ཕུད་དེ། 
ཁྱོ་རང་ང་ཁ་ང་ཞོན་དེ་ཆེན་ཟེརས།
སྦལ་ལུས་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་ཞབས་ལ་འཐམ་སྡེ་ཇུ་ཟེརས
ད་འདི་ནས་ཕར་ལ་ཧོར་
ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་བསླེབ་ཚུག་པ་ལམ་རྩོག་པོ་མེད
། ཟམ་པ་དག་ཐད་ཅིག་ཡོད་པ།
དེ་ལ་འཇིགས་མོ་མེད་ཟེརས་པ། 
དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཡིད་ཆེས་ཏེ་སྦལ་ལུ་སློག་
སྡེ་བཏངས།།
8

266
ཀི་སར་རང་དང་ཐུ་རུ་གཉིས་ཀ་སོང་སྟེ། ཟམ་པ་དག་ཐུད་ལ་བསླེབ་པ།
དེ་རུ་ལམ་སྲུངས་ཧོར་གྱི་སྲོབ་དགུ་པ་བློན་པོ འི་བུ་ཚ་དང་དམག་མི་བརྒྱ་ཟམ་
ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་གྱིས་མགྱོགས་པ་པན་ཇུང་སྲོང་པོ་བཙོ་སྟེ། ཁྱི་སོ་
ཅན་བེར་ཀ་འཁར་དེ་རིལ་མང་གི་འཕྲེང་བ་ཞིག་འཁར་ཏེ་ཁམ་ལོག་ཅིག་བཟོ་སྟེ་
སོང་བས། དེ་དམག་ཚང་མས་ཟེརས། ལྤ་སྲོང་པོ་ཁྱོ་རང་ག་ནས་ཡོངས་
ཟེར་པས། པན་ཇུང་གིས། ང་ལང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་ཞག་པོ་ལ་ཀེ་
སར་གྱིས་ནམ་ནས་ཆར་པ་མང་པོ་ ག་ཕབ་སྟེ། དེ་དམག་ཚང་མ་ལ་འདུག་ས་
མེད་པར་དཀགས་པོ་སོང་བས། པན་རྡུང་གིས་གན་དྲེ་ཞིག་གོན་ཏེ་འདུགས་པ་
ཆར་པ་ཙ་པིག་ཡང་མ་ཕོག། དེ་དག་ག་ཚང་མ་ཁོ འི་མདུན་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ་འདུགས།
ཁོས་ཟེརས་པ། ཉེ་ཞུ་ཚང་མ་མི་འདི་ཟམ་ཅིག་འདུག། ཁང་པ་ཞིག་མེད་པ་ག་
ཟུག་ལ་འདུག་ཆེན། ཉེ་ཞུ་རང་གིས་རྡོ་བ་བྱུང་། ངས་རྩིག་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་
ཁོང་ཚང་མས་རྡོ་བ་ཁྱོངས་པ། པན་ཇུང་གིས་བརྩིགས། དེ་ནས་མགྱོགས་པ་
གྲུབ་སོང་། གདུང་མའི་མགོ་ཚང་མ་ཀ་གཅིག་ཅིག་གི་ཁ་བཏང་སྟེ་བོརས། དེ་
ནས་ཁང་པ་དེ་གྲུབ་སྟེ་ན། ཡང་ཆར་པ་མང་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོང་བཅུགས། དེ་དམག་
ཚང་མ་ཁང་པའི་ནང་སོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། ལྷ་པན་ཇུང་ལྕེ་རང་ཡང་ནང་ལ་ཡོང་
ཟེརས་པ། པན་ཇུང་གིས། ང་ལ་ནང་ཞག་དང་ག་ནས་ཐོབ་ཡིན། འདི་རིང་
ཉེ་ཞུ་རིང་གིས་ནང་ལ་བོར་ཡིན་བ། ཐོ་རས་ལ་ང་ཁང་པ་ཞིག་ག་ནས་ཐོབ་ཡོན།
ང་པི་སྟ་འདུག་ན་འང་གྲིག་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོ་ཡི་སྟ་འདུགས། དེ་ནས་མཚན་ཕྱེད་
ཟམ་སོང་སྡེ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཀ་དེ་ལ་སི་ཁྱིམ་ཐག་པ་ཞིག་བདག་སྡེ་འཐེན་
བཏངས་པ། ཐོག་དེ་ཚང་མ་སླེབ་ཅིག་ལ་རྡེབ་སྟེ་ཡོངས། དེ་དམག་ཚང་མ་ཤི་

atj7
སོང་། དེ་ནས་གནམ་ལང་སྟེ་ན། དེ་རོ་ཚང་མ་ཟམ་པའི་ཁ་ནས། ཆུ་ལ་ཕངས།
ཁང་པའི་གདུང་མ་ཚང་མ་མེ་ལ་དུག་ནས། རྗེས་མེད་ཤུལ་མེད་བཅོ་སྟེན། ཧོར་
ཡུལ་ལ་སོང༌།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་སལ་ །ལགྱི་གོང་ཀ་རུ་བསླེབ་སོང་། དེ་རུ་རྟ་བརྒྱ་སྔོན་ལ་
བཏངས། རྡོ་བརྒྱ་ལྡིང་ན་ངཏངས། ཀེ་སར་རྡ་མི་གཉིས་ཀ་དཀྱིལ་ལ་འདུག་
སྟེ་སོང༌། དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཨ ་ོང་ཐང་གི་ཐང་སྟོད་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང་། དེ་རུ་རྟ་གཅིག་
སྔོན་ལ་བཏངས། རྟ་གཅིག་དང་ནུ་བོརས། ཀེ་སར་རང་དཀྱིལ་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ་སོང་།
དེ་རུ་ཁྲག་པ་ལན་གསུམ་བརྗེས། ཧོར་གྱི་གསེར་པོ འི་གསེར་མཁར་ལན་གསུམ་
འགལ་སོང༌། དེ་ནས་སོང་པ་སང་། ཧོར་གྱི་ར་རྫི་ཀུན་དང་ཐུག་སོང་། དེ་རུ་
ར་རྫི་ཁ་ཅིག་གླིང་ཡུལ་ན་ཟུམ་སྟེ་ཁྱེར་མཁན་ནི་མི་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁ་ཅིག་ཧོར་ཡུལ་
པ་ཡིན་པས། དེ་ཀུན་གྱིས་འདྲིས་པ། ལྤ་སྲོང་ཕྲུག། ཁྱོད་ག་ནས་ཡོངས།
གླིང་ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡོང་བ་མི་འདུག་ག། གླིང་པའི་དམག་འཁྱོང་བ་མི་འདུག་
ག་ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང་ཕྲུག་གིས་ལན་ལ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏབས།
གླིང་ཡུལ་གྱི་དམག་འཁྱོང་བ་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
གླིང་ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་ཤི་ཟེར་འདུག།
ཁོའི་ཕི་ལ་གདུང་རྟེན་ཞིག་བཞང་འདུག།
བླ་མ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཀུན་ལ་རྟ་འགྱེད་རེ་ཕུལ་འདུག།
བར་པ་རྣམས་ལ་གཡག་འགྱེད་རིག་བཏང་འདུག།
ཆུང་ཆུང་རྣམས་ལ་ར་ལུག་རེ་བཏང་འདུག།
སྲོང་པོ་ང་ཡིན་ཀྱང་ལུ་ག་ཞིག་ཐོབ་ལོ།

268
ལུ་ག་དེ་ལམ་གྱི་ཟ་ཉེས་ཤིག་སོང་ལོ།
ཡབ་སྟོན་པ་ཨ་བ་ཐང་ཞིག་གི་ཁ་ཤི་སྟེ་འདུག།
མིག་ཀན་ཁ་ཏས་ཙོག་གིན་ཞིག་འདུག་ལོ།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་ཨ་མ་རན་འཐག་ཚང་མ་ལ་འང་འདུག།
འང་ཕེ་སྐྱང་ཉེས་མེད་པ་སྐྱི་གུ་ཞིག་ངས་བཏངས་པ་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང་། གླིང་པའི་མི་ཀ ངུ་ཅེས་ཡོངས། ཧོར་གྱི་
མི་ཀན་མང་པོ་འཐད་སོང༌། དེ་ནས་གླིང་པའི་མི་ཀུན་ངུ་ཅེས་མཐོང་སྡེ་སྡིག་པ་
བསམ་སྟེ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དངོས་བསྟན་ཏེ་ཟེརས། ཀེ་སར་ང་ཡིན་ཁྱེ་ཞ་རང་
རིངས་མ་རིངས་ཟེརས་པ་ཁོང་འཐད་སོང་།
No. 3.
དེ་ནས་ཡང་གེ་སར་སྲོང་པོ་བཅོ་སྟེ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་། ཧོར་གུར་
དཀར་གྱི་མཁར་གྱི་རྩ་རུ་བསླེབ་སོང་། དི་རུ་ཆུ་དོང་བཞི་ཡོད་ཚུག། གཅིག་ནི་
གུར་དཀར་གྱི་ཡིན། གཅིག་ནི་གུར་ཐུག་བླ་མའི་ཡིན། གཅིག་ནི་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་
མོའི་ཡིན། ཆུ་དང་གཅིག་ནི་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་ཡིན་ཚུག། གར་དཀར་གྱི་
ཆུ་དོང་དེ་གསེར་གྱི་ཡོད་ཚུག། གར་སྨུག་བླ་མའི་ཟངས་ཀྱི་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཇོ༌ཇོ་
འབྲུ་གུ་མའི་གཡུའི་ཡོད་ཚུག། མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཡོད་ཚུག།
དེ་ཆུ་དོང་ཚང་མའི་ནང་དུ་སུའི་ནང་ཀོ་རི། སུའི་ནང་ཀླད་པ། སུའི་ནང་རྒྱུན་
སྦྱང་སྟེ་བོརས། ཁོ་རང་ལམ་གག་ཅིག་བ་ཁ་གྱེལ་ཏེ་འདུགས། དེ་ནས་གར་
དཀར་གྱི་ཆུ་མ་ཡོང་སྟེ་བལྟས་པ་སང་། ཆུ་མདོང་ཚང་མའི་ནང་དུ་ཀྲད་ཀྱི་སྦྲང་

269
སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཆུ་མས་ཟེརས་པ། ཝ་སྲོང་པོ་ཁམ་ལོག་ང་ཞའི་གུར་དཀར་གྱི་
ཆུ་དོང་པོ འི་ནང་དུ་རྩོག་པོ་ཅི་ཕི་ལ་སྦྱངས་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཀླད་ཀྱི་ཕངས་ནས་ཆུ་ཁར་
དེ་ཡོངས་པ། སྲོང་པོ་ལས་མི་ཁ་མ་ནུར་སོང༌། ཝ་སྲོང་པོ ། ང་ཆ་ཆུག་ནུར་
འང་ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང་པོས། ཁྱོ་རང་རིངས་ན་གོམ་སྟེ་སོང་། མ་རིངས་ན་
འཁོར་ཏེ་སོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཆུ་མ་གོམ་སྟེ་ན་སོང་།
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ཇོ་ཇོ་འི་ཆུ་མ་དེ་ཡོངས་པ། ཡང་བལྟས་པ་ཆུའི་ནང་
དུ་ཀྲད་ཀྱི་སྦྱང་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པ། ཆུ་མས་ཟེརས། ཝ་སྲོང་པོ་ཁྱོད་ག་ནས་ཡོངས།
ང་ཞའི་ཆུ་དོང་ཚང་མ་རྫོག་པོ་ཅི་ལ་བཅོས། ཨ་ངོས་ལ་ནར་འང་ཟེརས། སྲོང་
པོས་ཟེརས། མོ་ནོ་མོ་ལ། ཉེ་རང་རིངས་ན་གོམ་སྟེ་སོང་། མ་རིངས་ན་
འཁོར་དེ་སོང་། ང་ཐག་རིངས་ནས་ཡོང་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན། ངལ་དེ་རག་ཟེརས་པ།
ཆུ་མས་ཀྲད་པ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ཆུ་འཁར་དེ་ཆ་ཟ་ན། སྲོང་པོས་གསེར་གདུབ་པོ་ཆུའི་
ནང་དུ་ཕངས་བཏངས། ཆུ་མས་ཆུ་འཁུར་ཏེ་མཁར་ལ་སོང། དེ་ཚུག་པ་མཁར་
ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་ཆུ་ལ་སོང་་སོང་སྟེ། ཁོ་བསླེབ་པ་དང༌། ཇོ་ཇོས་ཁོ་ལ་ཁ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ།
ཁྱོ་རང་ཅི་ལ་འགོར་ང་ལ་ཆུ་དཀོན་མོ་སོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཆུ་ལས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་ཞུས་པ།
ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ། ང་ཏང་གི་ཆུ་དོང་པོ འི་མདུན་ལ་སྲོང་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཆུའི་ནང་དུ་
ཀྲད་ཀྱི་རེ་སྦ༌་སྟེ། ཀོ་རེ་སྦྱང་སྟེ། ཁོ་རང་ལམ་མི་ཁ་བྱེལ་ཏེ་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་
འདུག། 
ངས་ཆུ་དོང་ནང་ནས་ཀྲད་པ་དང་ཀོ་རེ་ཕིང་སྡེ་ཡང་འཁྲུ་སྡེ་ཆུ་ཁར་ཏེ་
ཁྱོངས་པ་། 
ཁོ་ལམ་མི་ཁ་ནས་མ་ནུར་བ་འདུགས། ངས་ནུར་ཟེརས་པ།
ཁོས་ཏེ་རང་རིངས་ན་བོམ་སྟེ་སོང་། མ་རིངས་ན་འཁོར་དུ་སོང་། ང་ཐག་རིངས་

༡70
ནས་ཡོངས་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཟེར་འདུག། དེའི་ཕྱི་ལ་ང་ཆུ་འགོར་སོང་བསམ་སྟེ།
ང་གོམ་སྟེ་ཡོངས་པ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ངོས་ཁོ་མིའི་ལུས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ཐོབ་མཁན་
ཞིག་གི་ཁ་ཅི་ལ་གོས་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོས་ང་ལ་ཆུ་ཞིག་བླག་ཟེརས་པ།
གཡོག་མོས་ལག་ཆུ་བླུགས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ འི་མཚུ་ག་ལ་གསེར་གདུབ་དེ་རན་
སོང་བ་ཇོ་ཇོས་བསམ། ཀེ་སར་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཡིན་ནཔ་བསམ་སྟེ་ནང་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་
མར་ཟན་ཞིག་གཡོས། ཇོ་ཇོ་རང་གཟབ་སྡེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་གོས་གོན་དེ་མར་ཟན་
དེ་ཁར་ཏེ། དེ་མི་ལ་ལྟ་ལ་ཡོངས། དེ་མི་ད་རུང་ལམ་མི་ཁ་གུལ་དེ་ཡོད་ཆུག།
དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོས་དེ་མི་ལ་གླིང་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཁ་བར་འདྲིས་ནས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།།
ལྔ་པན་ཇུང་སྲོང་པོ་ཁྱོད་ག་ནས་ཡོངས་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་མཁན་ཞིག་མིན་ན།
གླིང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་དེ་བདུད་ཡུལ་ནས་བསླེབ་བ་མ་བསླེབ།
ཡབས་སྟོན་པ་ཨ་བ་ཁམས་བཟང་འདུག་ག།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་ཨ་མ་ཁམས་བཟང་འདུག་ག།
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ཁམས་བཟང་འདག་ག།
གླིང་གི་དཔལ་ལེགོད་པོ་མ་རྒས་པ་འདུག་ག།
ནོ་འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་གྱི་ཟུར་མོ་ཕན་ན།
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དགུ་ལ་ཞིག་གསོབ་བཅོས་ས་མ་བཅོས།
ཁ་བར་བཟང་པོ་བཤད་ན་ཟ་ཅེས་ཅི་ཞིམ་གང་ཞིམ་བཏང་ཡིན།
ཁ་བར་ངན་པ་བཤད་ན་བྲ ཟན་དང་སྒོག་ཆུ་བཏང་ཡིན།

271
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང པོ་དེས་ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏུངས།
ཧོར་གྱི་ངོ་ ངོ་སོ་མས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་དང༌།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ །
ང་གླིང་ཡུལ་ནས་ཡོང་སྟེ་ལོ་མང་པོ་ ཞིག་སོང་ལོ།
གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་བདུད་ཡུལ་ལ་ཤི་ལོ།
ཁོ འི་དོན་ལ་གདུང་རྟེན་ཞིག་བཞང་འདུག།
གདུང་རྟེན་གྱི་ཞབས་རྡུན་ཕོ་ལད་ལ་བཙོ་རུག།
གདུང་རྟེན་གྱི་གྲྭ་གཅིག་གསེར་ལ་བཅོ་རུག
གདུང་རྟེན་གྱི་གྲུ་གཅིག་དངུལ་ལ་བཅོ་རུག།
གདུང་རྟེན་གྱི་གྲུ་གཅིག་ཟངས་ལ་བཅོ་རུག།
གདུང་རྟེན་གྱི་གྲུ་གཅིག་དུང་ལ་བཙོརུག
གདུང་རྟེན་གྱི་ཕུང་པ་དེ་མུ་ཏིག་ལ་བཅོ་རུག།
སྲོག་ཤིང་དེ་ཙན་དན་ལ་འདག་ལོ 1
སྙན་དར་ལ་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཁ་བཏགས་ཤིག་འདུག་ལོ།
དེ་ཀུན་གྲུབ་སྟེ་འབུལ་ཡ་ཞིག་འབུལ་འདུག།
བླ་མ་ཆེ་ཆེ་ཟམ་ལ་རྡ་དང་ཐུ་རུ་རེ་ཕུལ་འདུག།
བར་པ་ཚང་མ་ལ་གཡག་དང་གཡག་གུ་རེ་ཕུལ་འདུག།
ཆུ་ངུན་ཚང་མ་ལ་བ་བླང་རེ་དང་བེ་ཐོ་རེ་ཕུལ་འདུག།

2:2
སྲོང་པོ་ང་ཡིན་ཀྱང་ལུག་དང་རི་ག་ཞིག་ཐོབ་ལོ །
ལུག་དེ་ང་ལ་ལམ་ལ་ཟ་ཅེས་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
ཡབས་སྟོན་པ་ཨ་བ་ཤི་སྡེ་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
རོ་དེ་ཐང་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་གི་ཁ་འདུག་ལོ།
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོ་ཨ་མ་དེ་རན་འཐག་ལ་ལུང་འདུག
ལྕང་སྒྲིག་མེད་པ་ངས་སྐྱི་གུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་པ་ཡིན།
འབུ་དམར་ལམ་བསྟན་ལ་ཧོར་གྱི་མདའ་ཕོག་སྟེ་ཤི་ལོ།
ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་དེ་རྒས་དེ་འདུག་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ཁམས་བཟང་འདུག་ལོ།
གླིང་མཁར་ལ་ཞིག་གསོབ་མ་བཅོས་ཏོག།
རྟིང་ན་བཙོ་ཅིན་ཟེར་འདུག།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་ཚེར་ཀ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནསཇོ་ ངོས་མར་
ཟན་དེ་ཕོ་སྟེ་ན། ལོག་སྟེ་མཁར་ལ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་མཁར་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཇོ་ ཇོས་
བསམ། ཀི་སར་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེར་ན། མིན་ན་ཟེར་ན། ཡིན་ན་བསམ་མིན་ཞིག་
འདགས།
དེ་ནས་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་ཆུ་མ་ཆུ་ལེན་པ་ཡོངས་པ། ཁོ འི་ཆུ་དོང་
ལ་ཀཱ་ལིག་བཅུག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག་པས། ཀ་ལིག་དེ་བཅག་སྟེ་དེ་ནང་དུ་ཀོ་རི་སྦྱང་
སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག! ཆུ་མས་ཟེརས། ལྤ་སྲོང་པོ་ཁྱམ་པོ། ང་ཞུའི་ཆུ་དོང་ནང་
ད་ལྕོག་པོ་ཅི་ལ་བཅོས། ཁྱོད་ཨ་ངོས། ལ་སོང་ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང་པོས་ཟེརས།

p73
འོ་ནོ་མོ་ལེ་ནོ་མོ་རང་རིངས་ན་གོམ་སྟེ་སོང། མ་རིངས་ན་འཁོར་དེ་སོང༌།
ང་ཐག་རིངས་ནས་ཡོངས་མཁན་ནི་སྲོང་པོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པས། ཆུ་མས་
ཟེརས་པ། ཁྱོ་རང་ཡང་མིའི་ལུས་ལ་སྐྱེས་མཁན་ཡིན། ང་གོམ་སྟེ་མི་ཆ་ཟེར་ཏེ།
ཁོ་འཁོར་ཏེ་སོང་བ། ཡང་སྲོང་པོ་དེ་ཙ་པིག་རེ་དང་སོང་སྟེ། ཆུ་མ་དེ་ཆུའི་ལྕ་
བསླེབ་མ་བཅུགས། དེ་ནས་བུ་མོ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོད་རང་སྲོང་པོ་ཞིག་
མེན། སྲོང་རྫས་ཤིག་ཡིན་ནོག། ཁྱོད་པན་ཇུང་མེན་། པན་རྫས་ཤིག་ཡིན་ནོག།
ཨ་སལ་སལ་གྱི་གོང་ཀ་ནས་ཡོང་ཙ་ན། རྡོ་པ་བརྒྱ་སྔོན་ལ། རྡོ་པ་བགྱོ་ལྡིང་ན།
ཁྱོ་རང་དཀྱིལ་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ་མ་ཡོངས་ས[ ཨ་ལོང་ཐང་གི་ཐང་སྟོད་ནས་ཡོང་ཙ་ན།
རྡོ་པ་གཅིག་སྔོན་ལ། གྲྭ་པ་གཅིག་རིང་ན། ཁྱོ་རང་དཀྱིལ་ལ་མ་ཡོངས་ས།
ཨ་ལོང་ཐང་གི་ཐང་མཇུག་ན་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཁྲག་པ་ལན་གསུམ་མ་རྗེས་ས། གསེར་
པོ འི་གསེར་མཁར་ལན་གསུམ་འགལ་མ་བཅུགས་ས། ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང་ཕྲུག་
གིས་ཟེརས་པ། འོ་ནོ་མོ་ལེ། ནོ་ མོ་རང་ཤེས་མཁན་ཞིག་འདུག། ཨ་སལ་སལ་
གྱི་གོང་ཀ་ནས་ཡོང་ཙ་ན། ཤིག་དཀར་བརྒྱ་སྔོན་ལ་ཡོད་པ་ཡིན། ཤིག་ནག་
བརྒྱ་དྲུང་ན་ཡོད་པ་ཡིན། དེ་ནས་ཡུལ་ཞིག་འདུག་ངོ་སམ་སྡེ་ཁྲག་པ་ལན་གསུམ་
སྲུགས་པ་ཡིན། དེ་བོ་ཨ་ཅེ་ཉེ་རང་ལ་གསལ་པོ་མཐོང་ཡིན། ངའི་ཨ་བ་མགར་
ར་ཧི་མིས་ཡོད་ད། ང་ཨ་བའི་རྩ་ཡོངས་པིན། དེ་ནས་མགར་མོ་ལྕམ་གྱིས་ཆུ་
འཁར་དེ་ཕྱོངས་པ། ཁང་པ་ལ་ཆུ་དཀོན་མོ་སོང་བས། ཨ་བ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ།
ཐོ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་དང་སྐམ་པ་ཆེན་མོ་འཁོར་དེ། བུ་མོ་ལ་རྡུང་བ་ཡོང་སྟེ། བུ་མོ་དང་
ཐུག་པ། བུ་མོས་ཟེརས། ཨ་བྲ་ལེ། ང་ཏང་གི་ཆུ་དོང་པོ འི་ནང་དུ་ཀུ་ལིག་
བཅག་སྟེ། སྲོང་པོ་ཞིག་གིས་ཀླད་པ་དང་ཀོ་རེ་སྦྱང་སྟེ་འདུག། ཁོ་རང་ལམ་
86

27
མི་ཁ་གྱེལ་ཏེ་འདུག། ཁོས་ང་ལ་ལམ་མ་བཏང་བ། ཆུ་འགོར་སོང་། དེ་མི་བོ་
ཨ་བ་རང་གི་བུ་ཚ་ཡིན་ཟེར་འདག། དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བས་ང་ལ་པྲ་ག་
ཞིག་མེད་ཟེར་དེ་འདུགས
No. 4.
དེ་ནས་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་དེ། མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་སྲན་མའི་ཞིང་ཞིག་ཡོད་
ཚུག། དེ་ནང་དུ་སོང་སྟེ་ཚང་མ་རྔ་སྡེ་པང་སྟེ་ཟས་སྐྱུག་སྟེ། སྲན་མ་ལྕོག་པོ་
བཅོསྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། བུ་མོ་ཞིང་ལ་ལྟ་ལ་སོང་བ། ཞིང་ཚང་མ་གསེད་དེ་ཡོད་
ཅེས་མཐོང་སྟེ། སྲོང་པོ་ལ་ཁ་སྐྱེས་ཏེ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོད་ཁུམ་པོ། ང་ཞའི་ཞིང་ཚང་
མ་དང་སྲན་མ་ཚང་མ་རྩོག་པ་ཅི་ལ་བཅོས་ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང་པོས། ང་རང་གི་
ཨ་བའི་ཞིང་ཡཾ་ན། ཁྱོ་རང་ལ་ཅི་རྟོགས་དགོས་ཟེརས་པ། བུ་མོ་མགྱོགས་པ་
ཁང་པ་ལ་ལོག་སྟེ་སོང་། ཨ་བྲ་ང་གར་ར་ཧི་མིས་ལ་ཁར་སང་གི་སྲོང་པོ་དེས།
ང་ཏང་གི་ཞིང་ཚང་མ་རྫ་སྟེ་རྩོག་པོ་བཅོ་སྟེ་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བ་ལ་སྤྲོ་ཡོང་
སྟེ་སྐམ་པ་དང་ཐོ་བ་དེ་འཁར དེ་ལྟ་ལ་སོང་བས། སྲོང་པོ་ལ་ཨ་བྲ་ཡོང་ཅེས་
ཤེས་ཏེ། ཞིང་ཚང་མ་སྔོན་མའི་སང་རྒྱལ་བ་བཅོ་སྟེ། ཞིང་གི་མཐའ་མ་ལ་
འདུག་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་དེར་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་སྲོང་པོ་བུ་ཚ་
ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་ང་ཞུ་ལ་གནོད་པ་བཅོ་རུག་ག༑ སྔོན་ལ་ཆུ་དང་རྙོག་པོ་བཅོས།
དག་ས་ཞིང་ཚང་མ་ལ་ཅི་བཅོས་པིན་ཟེརས་པ། སྲོང་པོས་རྩོག་པོ་རྩི་ལ་བཅོ་
ཡིན། ང་ཨ་བྲ་རང་གི་བུ་ཚ་ཡིན། ཞག་དང་ངས་ཞིང་སྲུང་ངད། ཨ་བྲ་རང་
གིས་ལྟོས་འང་ཟེརས། ཨ་བས་བལྟ་ཟ་ན་ཞིང་ཚང་མ་སྔོན་མའི་མརོགས་ཡོད་

aཏོ
ཚུག། སྲོང་པོ་དང་ཨ་བ་གཉིས་ཀ་ཁང་པ་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ། བུ་མོ་ལ་ཟེར ། ལྔ་བུ་
མོ་ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་རྫུན་བཏང་སྡེ་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེར་ཏེ། སྐམ་པ་དང་འགྲམ་བ་འཐེནས།
ཐེ་བ་དང་རྡུངས།།
དེ་ནས་ཨ་བས་སྲོང་པོ་ལ་འདྲིས་པ། སྦ་བུ་ཚ་ཁྱོ་རང་ངའི་བུ་ཚ་
ཡིན་ན། ངའི་ཆ་ལག་ཚང་མ་ཕྱེས་དེ་དོང༌། སྲོང་པོས་ངས་ཐོ་རས་ལ་ཕྱེ་ཡིན་
ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་སྲོང་པོས་ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོ་ལ་ཞུ་བ་ཕུལས་པ། ཨ་ནེ་
སྐྱོད་དེ་བུ་ཚ་ལ་བསླབས་པ། ཐོ་རས་ལ་ང་གསེར་སྦྲང་ཞིག་ལ་རྫ་སྟེ་ཡོང་ཡིན།
ཆ་ལག་ཚང་མའི་ཁ་ང་འབབས་ཡིན། དེ་ཚང་མ་ང་རང་གི་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཕེས།
དེའི་རྟིང་ན་བྲོ་བ་ཆེན་མོ་དང་སྐམ་པ་ཆེན་མོ་མི་འདུག་ཟེར། དེ་ཟུག་བསླབསྟེ་
བོརས། གློ་རེ་ཚུག་པོ་ལ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་ཀྱིས། མགར་རོ་བརྒྱའི་ཆ་ལག་
ནང་དུ་ཁོ་རང་གི་ཆ་ལག་སྲེ་སྟེ་བོར་ནས་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཕེ་བཅུགས། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་
བལྟས་པ་གསེར་སྦྲང་གཅིག་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཆ་ལག་ཚང་མའི་ཁ་འབབས་པ།
ཁོས་དེ་ཚང་མ་ཕེས། དེ་ཚང་མ་ཕེ་ཚར་ཏེ་ན། གོ་བ་ཆེན་མོ་དང་སྐམ་པ་ཆེན་
མོ་མི་འདུག་ཨ་བྲ་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བས་ཐོ་བ་དང་སྐམ་པ་ཆེན་མོ་དེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་
ལ་ལུས་དེ་ཡོངས་པ་ཡིན། ངའི་བུ་ཁྱོད་ངོ༌ དོག་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེར་དེ། ཁོ་ཁང་པ་ལ་
བུ་ཚ་བཙོ་སྟེ་བོརས།
ཞུག་ཅིག་མཁར་ན་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་མ་ལ་གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་བཅོ་བ་ལ་
གཡོག་མོ་ཞིག་ལ་གསེར་བཀལ་ཏེ། ཇོ་ཇོ་ཁོ་རང་པལ་ཀྱི་ལ་བཞག་སྟེ།
མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་རྩ་ཡོང་ངད་ཚུག། མགར་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཏི་པི་འཕུད་དེ་པལཀྱིའི་
སྔོན་ལ་ཨོང་ངད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སོང་སྟེ་ཕྲ་ག་ཟུམ་སྟེ་ཟེརས།

༡76
ལྔ་བུ་ངན་ཅི་བཅོ་རུག། ཁོ་ཧོར་གར་དཀར་གྱི་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཡིན་དེ་ཟུག་མ་བཅོ་ ཟེརས་
པས། བུ་ཚས་ང་ཞུའི་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་དེ་ཟུག་བཅོ་ན་མགོ་རས་ཐོབ་ཆེན་ཟེར་རིན་
ཞིག་ལོག སྟེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གིས་ཟེརས། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ། འདི་རིང་སོལ་བ་
མེད། ཐོ་རས་ལ་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལོག་སྟེ་བཏང་སོང༌། བློ་ རེ་ཚུག་པོ་ལ་
མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སིས་བོང་བུ་བཅུ་ཟམ་ཞིག་བཙལ་ཏེ། མགར་ཕྲུག་ཐང་རྙེད་
དང༌། སྲིང་མོ་ལྕམ་གཉིས་ཀ་སོལ་བ་ལ་བཀལ་ཏེ་བཏངས་པས། ཨ་བས་
བསླབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། གཡས་པའི་ལུང་པའི་ཚོགས་ཚང་མ་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོའི་
ལྷབ་ཚས་ཡིན། དེ་ལ་མེ་མ་བདག། གཡོན་པའི་ནང་ད་སོང་སྟེ། སོལ་བ་བསད་
དེ་ཁྱོང་ཟེརས་པས། ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀ་བུང་བུ་འཁྲིད་དེ་སོང་བས། མགར་ཕྲུག་
ཐང་རྙེད་ཀྱིས་ཟེརས། ཨ་ཆེ་རང་ག་ལེ་ལ་ཡོང་ཟེར་དེ་ན། ཁོ་རང་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་
སྟེ་གཡས་པའི་ལུང་བའི་ནང་དུ་སོང་སྟེ། ཁོས་ཟེརས། ལྷ་གསུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་
བཅུ་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་། ཀླུ་གསུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་བཅུ་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ཤིག། གླིང་
ཡུལ་ལི་ལྷ་ཡོད་ན་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སྐྱོད། ཧོར ཡུལ་ལི་ལྷ་ཡོད་ན། མགོ་ལ་བལ་
ཐོད་གོན་ཏེ་རྒྱལ་ཁམས་ལ་ཁྱམ་སྟེ་སོང་ཟེར་དེ་སྟ་རི་བརྒྱབས། དེ་ཚུག་པ་མགར་
མོ་ལྕམ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་བུ་ཚ་དེ་ཚོགས་པོ་གུར་དཀར་གྱི་ལྷབ་ཚས་ཡིན།
མ་བཅད་ཟེརས་བ། ཕྲུ་གས་དབང་བཅོ་སྟེ། སོལ་བ་ཕད་བཅུ་ཟམ་ཞིག་བསད་
བཏངས། དེ་ནས་བུང་བུ་ལ་བཀལ་ཏེ་ཁྱོངས། དེ་ནས་ཆུ་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་དང་ཐུག་
སོང་། དེ་རུ་ཁོང་རང་གི་པ་པུ་ཕུད་དེ། བུང་བུ་ས་ག་གི་བ་པུ་འབངས་ཡིན་
ཟེར་ཏེ། རྡོ་བ་ཞིག་དང་ར་གོ་ཚང་མ་ཕུད་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་མ་གར་མོ་ལྕམ་
གྱིས་ཟེརས། ལྷ་ཁྱོད་སྟོན་པ་ཞིག་མེན་ན། གར་དཀར་གྱི་ལྷབ་ཚས་དེ་ཡང་མེ་

277
ལ་འདགས། དག་ས་བུང་བུའི་ར་གོ་ཚང་མ་ཕུད་བཏངས། ང་ཨ་བ་ལ་ཟེར་
བ་ཆེན་ཟེར དེ་སྔོན་ལ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་བའི་མ་དོན་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཟེརས།
ཨ་བ་ལེ། ཨ་བ་རང་ལ་བུ་ཚ་རྒྱལ་བ་ཞིག་ཐོབས་ཏོག། གུར་དཀར་གྱི་ལྷབ་
ཚས་ཡང་མེ་ལ་བདགས། ཆུ་ཆེན་མོ་ཞིག་གི་མདུན་ལ་བསླེབ་པ། བུང་བུ་ཚང་
མའི་ར་གོ་དེ་རྡོ་བ་དང་རྡུང་སྟེ་ཕུད་བཏངས། བུང་བུ་སག་ཆུས་ཁྱེརས་ཟེརས།
ཨ་བྲ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཐོ་བ་ཞིག་དང་སྐམ་པ་ཞིག་འཁར་ཏེ་ཁོ་ལ་རྡུང་བ་སོང་།
དེ་ནས་བུ་ཚ་དང་ཐུག་པ། ཁོས་བུང་བུ་ཚང་མ་ལ་སོལ་བ་བཀལ་ཏེ་ཁྱོང་ངད་ཚུག།
ཨ་བས་ཟེརས། ལྔ་བུ་ཚ་ཁྱོ་རང་གིས་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་ལྷབ་ཚས་དེ་ལ་མེ་
བདགས་ལོ། བུང་བུ་ཚང་མའི་རྐང་པ་རྡོ་བ་དང་རྡུང་ས་ལོ ། ཅི་བཅོས་པ་
ཡིན་ཟེརས་བས། དེ་ནས་བུ་ཚས་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བ་ལེ། ཨ་བ་རང་ལ་བུ་ཚ་
ཞིག་འབྱོར་པ་སང༌། ཨ་ཆེ་མ་དགའ་ཡིན་ནོག། ཡང་བུང་བུ་རྒྱབ་ཅེས་ལ་མ་
ལམ་པ་སང་། དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་ཡིན་ནོག། གར་དཀར་གྱི་ལྷབ་ས་ལ་མི་བདག་
ན་ཨ་བ་རང་གིས་ལྟོས་འང༌། བུང་བུའི་ར་གོ་ཕུད་ན། ཨ་བ་རང་གིས་ལྟོས་
ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བས་བལྟས་པ། གུར་དཀར་གྱི་ལྷབ་ཚས་དེ་བདེ་མོ་ཡོད་ཚུག།
བུང་བུའི་ར་གོ་ཡང་བདེ་མོ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཨ་བྲ་དེ་བུ་ཚས་ཟེར་མཁན་ལ་
བདེན་ཆེས་ཏེ་ཡོངས་པ། ཁང་པ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་བུ་མོ་ལ སྲོ་བཅོ སྟེ་སྐམ་པ་དང་བུ་
མོ འི་འགྲམ་པ་འཐེནས། ཐོ་བ་དང་རྡུངས།
དེ་ནས་རྙིང་མ་ཞིག་ལ་ཡང་ཇོ་ཇོ་གསེར་འཁོར་དུ་ཡོངས། བུ་ཚ་ལ་
སྦྱད་པ་ཕུ་བཅུགས། གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་དེ་ཕིང་སྟེ་བཟོ་ རྡོ འི་ཁ་རྡུངས་པ།
བཟོ་ རྡོ འི་ཁ་ནས་པར་སོང་། དེ་ནས་མགར་ཕྲུག་ཐང་རྙེད་གྱིས་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏིངས།

218
ང་ཞའི་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སྦྱད་པ་དེ་རླངས་པོ་འདྲ་བ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
ཨ་བ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་སྦུད་པ་ལ་ཡད་ཅིག་མི་འདུག།
ང་ཞུའི་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་སྐམ་པ་དེ་གཅན་གྱིས་ཟུམ་བ་མཚོགས་ཡོད།
ཨ་བ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་སྐམ་པ་ལ་ཡད་ཅིག་རང་མི་འདུག།
ང་ཞའི་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་ཐོ་བ་དེ་འབྲུག་ཆེན་ལྡིར་བ་འདྲ་ཡོད།
ཨ་བ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་སི་ཐོ་བ་ལ་ཡད་ཅིག་རང་མི་འདུག།
ང་ཁའི་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་མགར་བ་དེ་བི་ལ་འདྲ་བ་འཇབ་འཇབ་འཇབ་བད།
ཨ་བྲ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་ལ་ཡད་ཅིག་རང་མི་འདུག།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་དེ་སྟོར་སོང་། མི་ཚང་
མ་ནས་ལོངས་པ། གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་དེ་ཇོ་ཇོ འི་ཡོག་ན་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་
མགར་ཕྲུག་གིརྔ་་ཟེརས། འོ་ཧོ་ཧོ ། ཨ་བ་ནོ་ རོ འི་བུ་མོ། ཨ་མ་ནོ་རོ འི་བུ་མོ།
ཧོར་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་ཇོ་ཇོ་ས་མ་ཡིན་ལོ ། དེ་ཟུག་རྐུ་རུག་ཟེརས་པ།
ཇོ་ཇོ འི་གཡོག་མོ་དེ་ལང་སྟེ། ཕྲུ་གུ་དེ་ལ་མགོ་ལྕད་ཅིག་བཏངོས་པ། ཕྲུ་གུའི་
ཏི་པི་འབུད་སོང་བ། མགོ འི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་རྨེ་བ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག་པ། དེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་
མཐོང་སོང་} ཇོ་ཇོས་བསམ་འདི་མི་ བོ་ ངོ༌ ཏོག་གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡིན་
བསམ་སོང་། ཕྲུ་གུས་གཡོག་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། མི་སྟོ། ལྔ་གཡོག་མོ།
ཁྱོ་རང་ལ་ངས་ལན་ཞིག་བཏང་ཐུབ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་
དེ་ངས་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཨ་བུ་ཟེརས། དེ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་གསེར་དེ་བཟོ་ རྡོ འི་ཡོག་ལ་བོར་ཏེ་
ཁོས་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏོངས།

279
གསེར་གྱི་ཅི་མ་འབུམ་དེ་སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ནས་ལྷ་འབྲིས་ཤིག་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་དེ་བར་བཙན་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་འདན་མའི་བཙན་འབྲིས་ཤིག་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་དེ་འོག་ཕྱོགས་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྫོགས་པོ་ནས་ཀླུ་འབྲིས་ཤིག་ཁྱོང་ལོ།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ་དག་མཁྱེན་ནོ།
གསེར་གྱི་རེ་མ་འབུམ་ལ་བཟོ་ ཞིག་དོན།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་དགུ་མཁྱེན་ནོ།
གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མའབུམ་ལ་བཟོ་ ཞིག་དོན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཚར་དེ་ན། བཟོ་ རྡོའི་ཡོག་ནས་ཕིངས་པ་སང་།
གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་དེ་མེ་ཏོག་མཆོགས་བཙོ སྡེ་ཡོད་ཚུག! དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོས་
བསམ། གསེར་གྱི་རྩེ་མ་འབུམ་དེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་མིན་བ་བཅོ་མི་ཉན་བསམ་སྟེ།
མཁར་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གུར་དཀར་ལ་ཟེརས། རྒྱལ་པོ་ལེ། དེ་སྲོང་ཕྲུག་པོ་ཀེ་སར་
ཡིན་ཆོད་རིག་འདུག། དམག་ཡོད་ན་དམག་སྤང་། མཁར་མེད་ན་མཁར་
རྩིག་ཟེརས།
No. 5.
དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ཇོ་དང་གུར་དཀར་གྱིས་གྲབས་བཅོ སྟེ་ཟེརས་པ། ང་ཏང་
ཧོར་ཡུལ་གྱི་དཔའ་བོ་དང་། སྲོག་དག་པ་བློན་པོ་དང་ཚང་མ་ལ། ཕོ་ལད་ཀྱི་
གྱད་གན་འཐེན་བཅུག་ཡིན། ཁོ་ཀེ་སར་ཡིན་ན་ཕོ་ལད་ཀྱི་གྱོད་གཞ་འཐེན་

280
ཁྲུབ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། རྙིང་མ་ཞིག་ལ་དམག་སྐད་ཅིག་བཏང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། འདི་རིང་
ཕོ་ལད་དེ་གུད་གཞུ་སུ་ལ་འཐེན་ཁྲུབ་ན། མཁར་ན་ཡི་ནཱམ་མང་པོ་བཏང་འདུག།
དེ་ཕི་ལ་མི་ཚང་མ་ཡོང་ཤིག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་མི་ཚང་མ་དང་སྲོག་དག་པ་བློན་
པོ་ཡོངས། མགར ར་ཧི་མིས་ཀྱིས་བུ་ཚ་ལ་ཟེརས། ལྤ་བུ་ཚ། ང་དམག་
བློ་ལ་ཆ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། འདིའུ་ཚགས་མ་གང་དྲུད་པ་ལ་ཕིང་སྟེ་ན། ཁོ་རང་སོང་
བས། བུ་ཚ་དེས་འདི་འུ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་དྲུད་དེ་ཁུར་ཏེ། དམག་ཁྲོ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་
བལྟས་པ། སུ་ལ་ཡང་འཐེན་མ་ཐུབ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་སྲོག་དག་པ་བློན་པོས་
འཐེནས་པ། ནས་གང་མིན་པ་ཁོ་ལ་ཡང་མ་ཐུབ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་མགོར་སྡུག་
ཐང་རྙེད་ཀྱིས་ཨ་བ་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བ་ལེ༑ དེ་འུམ་བུའི་དྲང་ཁང་པོ་ངས་ཙ་
པིག་འཐེན་ཡིན་བ་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཅེས་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཚོར་དེ་
ཟེརས་པ། ཝ་ཁྱོ་རང་གི་བུ་ཚས་ཅི་ཟེར་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་
ཀྱིས ཁོས་འདི་འུམ་བུའི་དྲང་ཁང་པོ་སྐྱིལ་ཡིན་ཟེར འདུག་ལེ་ཟེརས། གུར་
དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོས་ཟེརས། ཁྱོ་རང་གི་ཕྲུ་གུ་ལ་སྐྱིལ་ཆུག་ཟེརས་པས། མགར་
ཕྲུག་སོང་སྟེ གཏུ་དེ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་ལ་ཁརས། མི་ཚང་མ་ཧབ་རྒོད་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་
ཨ བ་སོང་སྟེ་བཅོ སྡེ་བཏངས་པ། ཕྲུ་གས་ཟེརས། འདི་དྲང་ཁང་པོ་བཅག་
སྟེ་མི་སུ་ལ་ཕོག་ན། དག་མེད་ད་ཟེརས་པ། གཞུ་རྒྱུད་དེ་མི་སུའི་སྐྱེ་ལ་དྲིལ་ན་
དགྲ་མེད་དུ་ཟེརས། གར་དཀར་》ས་དགྲ་མེད་ཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་གན་
ཁར་ཏེན། སྙིང་གི་ཐིལ་ནས་སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ་སྟེ། ཕོ་ལད་གུད་གཞུ་ཁྱེད་གླིང་
ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་། ང་རང་གི་ལག་པའི་ནང་དུ་ཡང་གཞ་ཞིག་སླེབ་ཤིག། གཞུ་དེ་
འཆག་སྟེ་ཧོར་གྱི་དཔའ་བོ་ ཚང་མ་ལ་ཕོག་སྟེ་ཤི་ཤིག། གཞུ་རྒྱུད་དེ་ཧོར་གུར་

281
དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་སྐྱེ་ལ་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ ། ཕྱི་དབུགས་འཆད་དེ་ནང་དབུགས་ལ་ཁད་
ཅིག། དེ་ང་རང་ལ་ཆེ་བ་བཀྲོལ་མ་ཉན་ཅིག་ཟེར་ཏེ། གཞུ་དེ་བསྐྱིལས་པ།
གལྟ་དེ་ཆག་སྡེ་ཧོར་གྱི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མའི་མིག་ལ་ཕོག་སྟེ་ཤི་སོང་། གཞུ་རྒྱུད་
དེ་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ འི་སྐྱེ་ལ་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ། ཕྱི་དབུགས་ཆད་དེ་ནང་དབུགས་ལ་
ཁད་སོང་། དེ་ནས་གུར་དཀར་ཤི་ཅེས་ལ་ཐུག་སོང་། མགར་ཕྲུག་དེ་སོང་སྟེ་
བཀྲོལས་པ་སང༌། དེ་གྲོལ་སོང་། ཧོར་གུར་དཀར་མགར་ཕྲུག་ལ་མང་པོ་
འཐད་སོང་ནས། མིང་ལ་མགར་ཕྲུག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡན་བཏོགས།
ཡང་ཇིང་མ་ཞག་ན་མི་ཚང་མ་འཐམས་ཅེས་ལ་བསྡུས་པས། དེ་ཞག་
ལ་མགར་བ་ནི་མིས་སིས་ མ གང་ཕྲུག་ལ་ཁབ་ཚགས་མ་གང་དྲུང་པ་ལ་
བོར་ཏེ་ན། ཁོ་རང་དམག་ཁྲོ་ལ་སོང་བས། ཕྲུ་གས་ཁབ་ཚང་མ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་
དྲུད་དེ་ཁར་ཏེ་སོང་བ། ཨ་བས་ཟེརས་པ། ཝ་ཕྲུ་ག་ཁྱོད་ཅི་ལ་ཡོངས་ཁབ་དེ་
མ་དྲུད་པ་ཟེརས། ཕྲུ་གས་ཁབ་ཚང་མ་དྲུད་དེ་ཁར་དེ་ཡོད། ཨ་བྲ་རང་ལ་
དགོས་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས་པ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་ཁོས་བལྟས་པ། སྲོག་
དག་པ་བློན་པོ་དཀྱིལ་ལ་ལང་སྟེ་ ང་དང་གྲན་མཁན་ཡོད་ན་ཡོང་ངེར་རིན་ཞིག་
ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཕྲུ་གུས་ཨ་བྲ་ལ་ཤུབ་སྟེ་ཟེངས། ཨ་བ་ལེ། དེ་ཕྲ་ག་དང་
A
ང་འཐེམས་ཡིན་བ་ཟེརས། ཁྱེད་བུ་ངན་གྱིས་ཅི་ཟེར་འདུག། མི་ཚང་མ་ལ་
མ་ཁྲུབ། ཁྱེད་ལ་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཁྲུབ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཡང་གར་དཀར་ལ་ཚོར་
དེ་འདྲིས་པ། ཝ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་བུ་ཚས་ཅི་ཟེར་འདུག། མགར་རས་
ཁོ་བུ་ངན་གྱིས་སྲོག་དགུ་པ་ བློན་པོ་དང་འཐམས་ཡིན་ཟེར་འདུག་ལེ་ཟེརས།

sg
གར་ད་ཀར་གྱིས་མ་རྒྱལ་ལ་ཆ་ཡིན། འཐམས་ཆུག་ཟེརས། དེ་ནས་མགར་
ཕྲག་ལངས་ཏེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏུངས།
སྟེང་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་ཞིན་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
བར་བཙན་གྱི་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབ་མདན་མ་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
འོག་ཀླུའི་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་ལྗོག་པོ་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ཕ་ལ་ཀེར་ཟོང་སྙན་པོ་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
མས་ལྷ་བཀར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ་དག་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་དག་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་ཕ་སྤུན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
གླིང་གི་མ་སྤྱན་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་ལ་སྲོག་གཅིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
དེ་རིང་ང་ལ་སྤང་རོགས་ཤིག་མཛད་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ན། སྲོག་དག་པ་བློན་པོ་དང་འཐམས་པ་སང༌། སྲོག:
དག་པ་བློན་པོ་ས་ལ་གུལ་དེ་ཤིསོང་། དེ་མི་ཚང་མས་ཧབ་རྒོད་བཏང་སོང༌།
སྲོག་དག་པ་བློན་པོའི་གཉེན་ཚང་མ་ཡོང་སྟེ་རོ་དེ་ཁར་དེ་ཁྱེརས། མི་ཚང་མ་
ཡང་ཤོལ་སོང༌།
དེ་རྙིང་མ་ཞིག་ལ་རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་རི་ཁ་ལ་སུ་ཞོན་ཉན་ཡིན་ཚོད་
ལྟ་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ། མི་ཚང་མ་བསྡུས་པས། དེ་ཞག་ལ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་ཀྱིས་
ཕྲག་ཁང་པ་སྲུང་ཅེས་ལ་བོར་ཏེ་ཁོ་རང་སོང་། དེ་ནས་མི་ཚང་མ་འདུས་ཏེ།

283
རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་ལ་སྒ་སྟན་བསྟད་དེ་འོབ་ཆེན་དག་ཡོད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཡང
མགར་ཕྲུག་དེས་ཁང་པ་ཚང་མ་ཁར་ཏེ་མིའི་ཁྲོ་ལ་ལྟ་ལ་ཡོངས། ཨ་བས་ཁ་
སྐྱེས་ཏེ་ཟེརས་པ། ལྔ་བུ་ཚ། ཁོང་པ་ ་་སྤང་བ་ཅི་ལ་ཡོངས་ཟེརས་པ། ཕྲ་གས་
ཟེརས། ཨ་བ་ལེ། ཁང་པ་དེ་ དང་ཚང་མ་ལ་མཐོང་ས་རུ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་ཡོད་
ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བ་ལ་ཅང་ཟེར་མ་ཉན་པས། དེ་ནས་མི་ཚང་མ་རྟའི་ཁ་ཞོན་ནད་
ཚུག་པ། མི་སུ་རེ་འོབ་ཆེན་གཉིས་ས་བ་བསླེབ། མི་སུ་རེ་འོབ་ཆེན་གསུམ་མི་
བ་བསླེབ། སུ་གཅིག་གི་ཁ་བསླེབ། མགར་ཁྲུག་གིས་ཡང་ཨ་བ་ལ་ཟེརས།
ཨ་བྲ་ལེ! དེ་བུང་བུའི་ཁ་ང་ཞོན་ཡིན་བ་ཟེརས། དེ་ཟུག་གར་དཀར་ལ་ཚོར་
ཏེ་འདྲིས་པ། ལྔ་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས། ཁྱོ་རང་གི་བུ་ཚས་ཅི་ཟེར་འདུག་ཟེརས།
ཨ་བ་དེས་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོས་དེ་བོང་བུའི་ཁ་ཞོན་ཡིན་ཟེར་འདག་ལེ་ཟེརས།
གར་དཀར་གྱིས་མ་རྒྱལ་ལ་ཆེན་ཞོན་ཆུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོ་སོང་སྟེ་སྒྲུབ་ན་ཞོན་
ནད་ཚུག་པ། མི་ཚང་མས་ཧབ་རྒོད་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་ཁོ་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ།
རྣམ་ཆོག་ལ་འཐམ་སྟེ་ཞེན་ནད་ཚུག། དེ་ནས་ཨ་བ་སོང་སྟེ། ཁྱོད་བུ་ངན་ཁྱོ་རང་
ད་ཚུག་པ་རྟ་ལ་ཞོན་མི་ཤེས་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ན། འདི་ཕྱོགས་ན་ཞོན་ཟེར་ཏེ་
བསླབས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཁོ་སྲིབ་ཅིག་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ། ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་སོང་ནས་གླིང་ཡུལ་
ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ། རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་དེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བོར་ཏེ། ཡང་རྟ་ཞིག་ལ་
ཞོན་ཏེ་ནམ་མཁའ་ནས་བུད་དེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་རྡོ་དེ་ཤི་སོང་། མགར་སྡུག་དེ་
གསོན་ཏེ་ལུས། དེ་ནས་མི་ཚང་མ་ཡམ་ཚན་སོང་། མགར་ཕྲུག་དེ་གར་དཀར་
གྱི་རིན་ཅན་སོང༌ ། ཞག་ཁ་ཅིག་སོང་སྡེ་ན །གུར་རྨུག་བླ་མ་དེ་ལ་མཚན་ལ་སྙི་ལམ་
ཡབ་ཚན་མང་པོ་མཐོང་སྟེ། གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་འདི་ལྟར་བདོངས།།

284
ཁྱེད་ཧོར་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོས་བླ་མ་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ངང་།
ཁྱེད་བུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོས་གར་རླིག་ངའི་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང༌།
དེ་རིང་མཚན་ནི་སི་ལམ་དེ་ངན་པ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
དེ་རིང་བ་སྙི་ལམ་དེ་ལྟས་ངན་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་ལྷ་ཚང་མས་གསེར་ཐོད་གོན་པ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཧོར་གྱི་ལྷ་ཚང་མས་བལ་ཐོད་གོན་ཏེ་ངུ་བ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་དམག་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཧོར་ཡུལ་གཞུང་ལ་མེ་ཆེན་ཞིག་འབར་ར་མཐོང་ལོ།
མེ་ཆེན་དེ་ལ་ཆུ་ཆེན་ཞིག་བླུག་པ་མཐོང་ལོ།
ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་འཁྱེར་བ་རིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཉེ་རང་བསད་པ་ཞིག་མཐོང་ལོ།
གསེར་རལ་ཅན་དང་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་གཉིས་ཀའི་མགོ་བྲག་ཚའུ་དང་
དུང་ལ་ཕུལ་བ་མཐོང་ལོ།།
ཁྱེད་ལ་དམག་ཡོད་ནི་སྡུས་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་མཁར་མེད་ན་རྩིག་ལོ།
གསམ་བློ་སྔོན་ལ་མ་བཏང་ན་འགྱོད་པ་དྲུང་ན་ཡོང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་རྔརས་པ་སང་། གུར་དཀར་དང་ཇོ་ཇོ་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་གྲབས་
བཅོ་བཅོ་ཚུག་པ། གླིང་ཡུལ་ནས་དམག་བཏང་ཕྱིར་དུ་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་སྲར་གྱི་
ལའི་རྩ་རུ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོས་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།

26
པའི་མདའ་མོ་ཁྱོད་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་འགྲོ་དགོས་ལོ།
མདའ་མོ་དཀར་པོ འི་ལམ་བསྟན་དེ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ལོ།
ཧོར་གྱི་བྲུའི་ཀ་ལ་འཕོག་པ་རིག་དགོས་སུག།
གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཟུར་མོ་དྲག་པོ་ ཞིག་ཡོང་ཤིག།
གླིང་ཀེ་སར་ལ་མེན་ན་མདའ་འཕུད་པ་མ་ཉན་ཤིག།
མགར་ར་བརྒྱའི་མེ་བཅད་མ་ཕོག་ཤིག།
ཤིང་མཁན་བརྒྱའི་སྟེབ་བཅད་མ་ཕོག་ཤིག།
མི་ཤེད་ཅན་སུ་ལ་ཡང་འཕུད་པ་མ་ཉན་ཤིག།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་མདའ་དཀར་པོ འི་ལམ་བསྟན་དེ་བཏངས་བས། མདའ་
དེ་ཧོར་གྱི་འབྲུས་སི་ཀ་བ་ལ་ཕོག་སོང༌། དེ་ནས་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཟུར་
མོ་དྲག་པོ་ཡོངོས་པས། ཡུལ་གྱི་ཤིང་མཁན་ཚང་མ་བསྡུ་སྟེ ། མདའ་དེ་
བཅདས་པ་ཙ་པིག་འང་མ་ཉན་སོང༌།
དེ་ནས་མགར་ར་ཚང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྡེ་མེ་བཅད་བཏངས་པ་མ་ཉན། དེ་ནས་
ཅི་ཡང་བཙོ་ཐབས་མ་ཡོངས་པས། མགར་ཕྲག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡན་ལ་བོས་པ།
རྒྱལ་ཟེར་ཏེ་གཡོག་མོ་བལ་ཁོལ་མ་དེ་བོས་པ་བདངས། ཁོ་སོང་སྡེ་མགར་ཕྲུག་
ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ཝ་མགར་ཕྲུག། ཧོར་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཟུར་མོ་དྲག་པོ་
ཡོད། འབྲུས་སི་ཀ་ལ་གླིང་པའི་མདའ་ཞིག་ཕོག། སྐམ་ཆེན་ཁར་དེ་ཡོང་།
ཐོ་བ་ཆེན་མོ་ཁར་དེ་ཡོང་ཟེརས་པ ། མགར་ཕྱུག་གིས་སྐམ་ཆེན་ཁར་དེ་ཨ་བྲ་
ལུང་བ་སོང་། ཐོ་བ་ཆེན་མོ་ཁར་དེ་ཨ་མ་ལུང་བ་སོང་། ང་ཐོ་རས་ལ་འཁར་
དེ་ཡོང་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། གཡོག་མོ་ དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་སོང་། ཐོ་རེ་ཚུག་པོ་ལ་ཡང་བལ་

sg
ཁོལ་མ་བོས་པ་ཡོངས་པ། མགར་ཕྲག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡན་མཁར་ལ་སོང་།
དེ་ནས་བལྟས་པ། ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེའི་མདའ་ཡིན་བ་ཤེས་ཏེ། ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་
ལ་ཟེརས། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ། ཉེ་རང་གིས་འདི་རིང གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་བཞུགས་པ་མཚོག་
སེ་གོན་ཅེས་གོན། ཕོག་ཅིག་དོང༌། ཀལ་ཙེར་རོན། ངུ་འིན་ཞིག་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར།
གསེར་པོ འི་གསེར་མཁར་མ་ལྡན་ཅིག །
གླིང་མཁར་རྩེ་དག་རང་མཁར་ལྡན་ཅིབ། །
ཧོར་གུར་དཀར་གྲོགས་སྐལ་མ་ལྡན་ཅིབ།།
གླིང་གེ་སར་གྲོགས་སྐལ་ལྡན་ཅིག །
གསེར་རལ་ཅན་དང་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་བུ་སྐལ་མ་ལྡན་ཅིག།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ནི་མདའ་དེ་འབུད་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ ཇོས་ཁོས་བསླབས་
མཁན་ནང་ལྟར་དུ་འིན་ཞིག་དེ་ཚུག་ཟེརས་པ་མདའ་དེ་འབུད་དེ་ཡོངས། དེ་ནས་
མདའ་ལྟོང་ནང་དུ་མར་གྱིས་ལ་ཅིག་བཏང་སྟེ། གར་དཀར་གྱི་མདའ་དོང་ནང་
དུ་ཁྱེར་དེ་བོར་ཟེརས་པ། མདའ་དེ་མདའ་དོང་ནང་དུ་ཁྱེར་ཏེ་བོརས ། དེ་ནས་
གུར་དཀར་ཡང་ཕན་སོང་། མདའ་དེས་ཧོར་གྱི་མདའ་ཚང་མ་བཅག་སྟེ་མེད་
མཁན་བནོ སྟེ་ན། མདའ་དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་དཔལ་ལེ་རྩར་སོང་།
_S ，， G，
ཧོར་གྱིས་གླིང་ཡུལ་གྱི་དམག་ངོ༌ དོག་འཁྱོང་ཅེས་ཡིན་འགྲོ ། ལྟ་མཁན་
མི་ཞིག་བཏང་ན་སུ་བཏང་ཡིན་ཟེར་ཏེ་གྲབས་བཅོས་པ། མགར་ཕྲུག་སེང་གེ་དོན་
ལྡན་བཏང་རྗེས་ལ་ཁ་རམས། དེ་ནས་དེ་ཟུག་ཚོར་དེ་མགར་ཕྲུ་ག་ཁང་པ་ལ་ཡོང་

2a7
སྟེ། ཨ་བ་ངང་སྲིང་མོ་ལ་ཟེརས། ང་གླིང་པའི་དམ་ག་ལ་ལྷ་སོ་ལ་སོང་ཟེར་
འདག་ཟེརས་བ་ སྲིང་མོ་གར་ཆོ་ཆོ་རོན་མོ་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཞུ་ཕུལ་ལ་
སོང༌། གསེར་ཐ་ལི་གང་སང་སྡེ་ཁར་དེ་སོང་སྡེ་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྩར་སོང་
སྟེ་ཀླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བླངས།
ཧོར་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ་མཁྱེན་ནོ་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
བར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་མཁྱེན་ནོ་བདག་ལ་གསན།
པའི་མིང་བོ་དམག་ལ་ལྟ་མ་བཏང་ལོ།
ངའི་མིང་བོ་ལ་སྟངས་ཤིག་མེད་ལོ།
ངའི་མིང་བོ་ལ་གྲོས་ཤིག་ནང་མེད་ལོ །
ཡང་ན་ཁོ་ལ་ཞོན་རྡོ་ཞིག་མེད་ལོ།
ཡང་ན་ཁོ་ལ་མདའ་གཞུ་ཞིག་མེད་ལོ།
ཡང་ན་ཁོ་ལ་དཔུང་གཏད་ཅིག་མེད་ལོ །
ཡང་ན་ཁོ་ལ་ཁར་ཇི་ཡང་ཁར་རྒྱུ་མེད་ལོ །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།
མགར་མོ་ཁྱོད་ཚུར་མ་ཡོང་ཕར་ལ་སོང་།
ཁོ་ལ་ལམ་རྒྱུས་མེད་ན་གླིང་ཡུལ་ནས་འདིར་ག་ཟུག་ལ་བསླེབ །
ཁོལ་སྟངས་མེད་ན་ཕོ་ལད་གདོ་གཞུ་ཅགས་ས།
ཁོ་ལ་གྲོས་མེད་ན་སྲོག་དག་པ་བློན་པོ་བསདས་ས།

s
ཁོ་ལ་སྟངས་མེད་ན་རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་བདུལ་ལ།
ཁྱོད་ཚུར་མ་ཡོང་ཕར་ལ་སོང་།
དེ་དྲུག་ཟེར་དེ་དབང་སོ་སྟེ། ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་རྣས་དང་ལག་ཆ་ཚང་མ་བཀལ་
དེ། ད་རྒྱལ་བ་ཞིག་བཏང་སྡེ ། ཧོར་གྱི་དཔའ་བོ་བཞི་བཅུ་མཉམ་པོ་བཏུངས།
དེ་ནས་སྲིང་མོ་མགར་ཆ་མོ་རོན་མོས། མགར་ཕྲུག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡན་ལ་བསླབ་
བྱ་བཏང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཨ་ཅེ་བའི་ནོ་ནས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ །
མགར་ཕྲུག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡན་བདག་ལ་གསན།
ཞག་གསུམ་སོང་སྟེ་ལམ་རྩོག་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད།
དེ་ལམ་ལ་ཀར་དར་བོ་ སྡེ་སོང་ལོ།
དེ་ནས་ལྷ་ཐོ་དཀར་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
སྟེང་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལི་ལྷ་ཡིན་ཏེ་ཤིག་སྟེ་སོང་།
དེ་ནས་ལྷ་ཐོ་དམར་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད།.
དོ་བར་བཙན་གྱི་ལྷ་ཐོ་ཞིག་ཡིན་དེ་ཡང་ཤིག།
དེ་ནས་ལྷ་ཐོ་ནག་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད།
དེ་འོག་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་མི་ཡིན་ཏེ་ཡང་ཤིག་སྡེ་སོང༌།
དེ་ནས་ལྷ་ཐོ་སྨུག་པོ་ཞིག་ཡོད།
དེ་ཧོར་གར་དཀར་གྱི་ལྷ་ཐོ་ཡིན།
ར་སྐྱེས་སྨུག་པོ་ཞིག་བསད་དེ་གསོལ་ཏེ་སོང་།

289 _ ་
དེ་ནས་སྲར་གྱི་ལའི་ཁ་སླེབ་ཆེན།
དེ་རུ་གླིང་པའི་དམག་བསླེབ་སྡེ་ཡོད་ན།
རྡ་མ་བསྟན་རྣ་མཆོག་སྟོན།
མདའ་མ་བསྟན་མདའི་ལྟོང་སྟོན།
བཞུ་མ་བསྟན་གཞུ་མགོ་སྟོན།
མི་མ་བསྟན་ཏི་པི་སྟོན།
གླིང་པའི་དམག་ངོ་དོག་ལ་ཡོད་ན།
རིའི་སེམས་ཅན་ཚང་མ་འགྲུལ་བ་མཐོང་ཡིན།
དེ་ཟུག་བསླབ་བྱ་བཏང་སྡེ་ན། མགར་ཕྲུག་ཇེ་ང་གི་དོན་ལྡན་དང་། ཧོར་གྱི་
དཔའ་བོ་བཞི་བཅུ་མཉམ་པ་སོང་། ཞག་གསུམ་འགྲུལ་དེ་ན། དེ་ལམ་ལྕོག་
པོ འི་རྩ་རུ་བསླེབ་པ། ཁོ་སྔོན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་ལམ་ཕྲ་མོ་ཞིག་གི་རྩ་རིབ་ཤིང་ཞིག་གོན་
དེ་འདུག་སྟེ། ཧོར་གྱི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ཚིར་ལ་ཆུའི་ནང་དུ་འཕུལ་དེ་བཏང་སྟེ།
གཅིག་ཀྱང་མེད་མཁན བཅོས་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་ཁོ་རང་གཅིག་པོ་སོང་། ལྷ་མགོ་
དཀར་པོ་དམར་པོ་ནག་པོ་ཚང་མ་དང་ཐུག་པ། ཁོས་གསོལ་གྱིན་མཆོད་ཀྱིན་
ཞིག་སོང་བས། དེ་ནས་ལྷ་མཐོ་སྨུག་པོ་དང་ཐུག{ དེ་ཧོར་གྱི་ཡིན་པ་སང་།
ཤིག་སྟེ་མེད་མཁན་བཅོ སྟེ་སོང། དེ་ནས་ཨ་སྲར་སྲར་གྱི་ལ་མགོ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་
བལྟས་པ། ཨ་ངོས་ལ་རྩ་ལ་གླིང་པའི་དམག་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། རྐྱང་རྒོད
དབྱེར་པ་ལ་སྒ་བསྟད་དེ་འོབ་ཆེན་དེ་བལྟབ་སྟེ་ཐེ་ཆེ་བཏང་སྟེ་ན། གླིང་པའི་དམག་
འབྲང་ལ་འཕུད་བཏངེས། ཁོ་རང་ལ་མགོ་ན་དབྱིབ་སྟེ་མགོ་པིང་སྡེ་འངགས།
37

a9)
མདའ་ལྟོང་པིང་སྟེ་བོརས། གཏའི་མགོ་དེ་ཕིང་སྟེ་བོརས་པ། གླིང་པའི་ལྟ་བ་
མིག་གི་རབ་ལ་དེ་ལ་ལའི་མགོ་ན་མཐོང་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག་འདི་ལྟར་བཏུངས།
ཀྱེ་མ་གསན་དང་ཨ་ག་ལེ། །
ཤེ་མ་གསན་དང་དཔལ་ལེ་ལེ།
སྲར་གྱི་ལ་ན་ཧོར་གྱི་སོ་པ་འདུག།
རྡོ་ནི་མ་མཐོང་རྣམ་ཆོག་ཟམ་མཐོང་འདུག།
མི་དེ་མ་མཐོང་ཏི་པི་ཟམ་མཐོང་འདུག།
མདའ་དེ་མ་མཐོང་མདའ་ལྟོང་ཟམ་མཐོང་འདུག །
གཞུ་ནི་མ་མཐོང་གཞུ་མགོ་ཟམ་མཐོང་འདུག།
ང་ཏང་དཔའ་བོ འི་ལྗག་རེས་སུ་ཞིག་ཡིན།
ཧོར་གྱི་སོ་པ་ལ་ལྟ་ལ་ཆ་དགོས་སུག།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་གུ་དཔལ་ལེས་ཞིབ་ཆ་བལྟས་པ། ཅི་ཡང་མ་
མཐོང་བས། ལན་དུ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས།
ཁྱེད་ལྟ་བ་མིག་གི་རབ་ལ་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ །
མིའི་ཁྲིམས་ལ་མཚན་འདྲེ་མཐོང་ཅེན་ལོ །
ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་ཁྲིམས་ལ་ཉིན་འདྲེ་མཐོང་འདུག
ང་ཞ་ཚང་མ་མཐོང་བ་མིན་འདུག་ལོ།
ཧོར་གྱི་སོ་པ་ག་ན་འདུག་ལོ།

ཧྥ01
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ] ལྟ་བ་མིག་གི་རབ་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཕུ་ཐུངས་གཅིག་
ནང་དུ་མགོ་བཏངས། 
ཕུ་ཐུངས་གཅིག་ནང་རྐང་པ་བཏང་སྟེ་གཉིད་ལོག་སྟེ་
འདུགས། 
དེ་ནས་ཨ་བུ་དཔལ་ལེས་ལྟ་འིན་ཞིག་འདུགས་པ་སང༌། ཁོ་ལ་
ཡང་སྲིབ་ཅིག་མཐོང་སོང་བས། དཔལ་ལེས་གོང་མ་བུ་ཚ་ལྗག་རེས་ལ་བསྐོས་
པས། རྡོ་དེ་དུང་གི་དར་དཀར་བཏང་སྟེ་ཁོ་སོང་། ཁོ་དེ་ལ་མགོ་ལ་བསླེབ་ཙ་ན།
མགར་ཕྲུག་དེ་ཕོ་རོན་ཅིག་ལ་རྫསྟེ་ནམ་མཁའ་རུ་ཤོར་སོང་། བོང་མ་བུ་ཚ་ཁྲ་
ལ་རྫ་སྟེ་རྡས་པ། ནོན་ཀྱིས་ཆ་འིན་ཞིག་དང༌། ས་བི་རྩེ་ཞིག་ལ་རྫ་སྟེ །
གཡའ་གསེབས་ཤིག་གི་ནང་དུ་ཤོར་བ། གོང་མ་བུ་ཚ་ལ་ཏི་ར་ཞིག་ལ་རྫ་སྡེ་
རྡས། དེ་ཟུག་མང་པོ་བཅོས་པ་སང༌། གོང་མ་བུ་ཚ་ངལ་ཏེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ་
དམག་འབྲང་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང༌། ཨ་ག་དཔལ་ལེ་ལ་ཟེརས། ངའི་རྟ་ཡང་ངལ་
སོང་། ང་རང་ཡང་ངལ། ཡང་ཞིག་སུ་བཏང་ན་འང་དོང་ཟེརས། །
ཡང་ལྗག་རེས་དེ་དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག་ཡིན་ཚུག་པས། དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་
སྟག་ལ་རྟ་ནག་ཁྲ་གློ་རིངས་བཏང་སྟེ། ཁོ་ཞན་ཏེ་མདུང་སྐོར་ཁྱོང་ངིན་ཞིག་སོང་།
ཁ་ན་མེ་འབར་རིན་ཞིག་དེ་ས་ཁྱད་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་སང་། མགར་ཕྲུག་དེ་རིའི་ཤ་
བ་ཞིག་ལ་ཇི་སྟེ་ཤོར་སོང་། 
དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག་ཁྱི་ཞིག་ལ་རྫ་སྟེ་རྡས་པ།
ཆུའི་ཉ་ཞིག་ལ་རྫུསྡེ་ཤོར་སོང༌། དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག་ཆུ་སྲམ་ལ་རྫསྟེ་རྡས་པ།
ཡང་ར་མ་ཞིག་ལ་རྫསྟེ་ཤོར་བ། སྤྱང་ཁུ་ལ་རྫསྟེ་རྡས། དེ་ཟུག་མང་པོ་བཅོས་
པ། ཌ་ནག་ཁྲ་གློ་རིངས་དེ་ངལ་དེ་ཆད་སོང་བ་སང་། རྡོ་ལ་མང་པོ་རྡུང་སྟེ་དེར་
པང་སྟེ། དམག་བྲང་ལ་ཡོང་སྟེ། རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ལ་ཏོན་མིས་བཅོས་པ།
དཔལ་ལེས་ཟེརས། པ་དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག། བྱོ་རང་སྙོན་བ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ན།

ga
ད་ལྟ་ཚུག་པ་རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པའི་ཁ་མི་སུས་ཀྱང་ལག་པ་མ་བཏངས། རྡོ་དེ་གླིང་
ཀེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཡིན། ཁྱོད་ག་ཟུག་ལ་ཞོན་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་
སྟག་ལ་སྲོ་ཆེན་མོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཁྱོད་ཁྱི་རྒན་གྱིས་དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཏེ་གླིང་གི་ཤ་
སྙིང་མོར་སྙིང་ཟན་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཚར་བཅུགས། ད་ལྟ་ཧོར་གྱི་སོ་པ་ནག་ཚང་
འབུད་དེ་ཆེན་ཟེར་ཏེ་དབང་བཅོ་སྟེ ། རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་སོང་བས།
རྐྱང་རྒོད་དབྱེར་པ་ལ་ཀེ་སར་ཡིན་བ་ཤེས་དེ་ཡང་རི་ཞིག་ལ་ཁར་དེ་ཁྱེརས་པ
དེ་ནས་ཡང་ལོག་སྟེ་ཁྱོངས་པ། མགར་དྲུག་གིས་ཀེ་སར་རི་དངོས་བསྟནས་པ།
དཔལ་མོ འི་ཨ་སྟག་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཟེརས། ཁྱེད་བསམ་བ་མེད་མཁན་ནི་ཀྭ་སར་
གྱོལ་པོ། ཁྱོད་དངོས་མ་བསྟན་བ། ང་ལ་ནགས་མང་པོ་མཐོང༌། ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་དེ་ཟུག་
བཅོས་པ་གླིང་མཁར་ཤུལ་མ་ལ་གྱུར་སོང༌། ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ་ཧོར་གྱིས་ཁྱེརས།
གླིང་གི་ཤ་སྙིང་ཚར། མར་སྙིང་ཟན་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཚར་སོང་། ད་རུང་ཡང་ཡངས་
པ་བཅོ་ངུག་ག་ཟེརས །།
No, 7.
དེ་ནས་གེ་སར་དང་དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག་གཉིས་ཀ་གླིང་པའི་དམག་འབྲང་ལ་
སོང་། དེ་རུ་ཚང་མ་འཛོམསྟེ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཟེརས། ང་སྔོན་ལ་ཆེན། ཁུ་ཞུ་
དཔའ་བོ་བདུན་རྟིང་ན་ཡོང་ཟེར་དེ། ཀེ་སར་སོང་ནས་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ །
གར་དཀར་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ། དམ་གཅིག་ཡོད་ན་སྡུས། མཁར་རྩིག་
ན་ཚིག། གླིང་པའི་དམག་མང་པོ་ཡོང་འདུག། ང་དང་མཉམ་པོ་སོང་མཁན་ནི་
དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་གླིང་པའི་དམག་གིས་བསད་ཚར། ང་རང་གཅིག་པོ་འབུད་
སོང་། གླིང་པའི་དམག་རྩལ་པ་འདག་ཟེར་དེ་ན། ཁོ་མགར་བའི་ཁང་པ་ལ་

294
སོང་། དེ་ནས་མགར་ར་ཧི་མིས་ཡང་བུ་ཚ་བསླེབ་ཟེར་ཏེ་མང་པོ་འཐད་སོང་།
སྲིང་མོ་ཡང་འཐད་དེ་ཀལ་ཅོར་བླུགས། ཞག་བདུན་སོང་སྡེ་ན། གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་
བོ་ོ། ཨ་ག་ག་ནི། གོང་མ་བུ་ཚ། ལྟ་བ་མིག་གི་རབ་ལ། རྣ་གཡུ་རྣ་རྩལ།
མདའ་དཔོན་གོང་མ། དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག། ཁོང་ཚང་ཀ་རྡ་རེ་ལ་ཞོན་དེ་རྡ་རི་
ཁྲིད་དེ་ཁྱོངས་པ། གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་མཐོང་སྟེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས་སོང་།
ཇོ་ཇོ་སོ་ནས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ ། །
ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མས་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་ །
ངའི་ཨ་བའི་དུས་ལ་རྟ་ཚོངས་པ་མ་བསླེབ་ལོ།
ངའི་མེ་མེའི་དུས་ལ་ཡང་རྡ་ཚོངས་པ་མ་བསླེབ་ལོ།
རྟ་དེ་ཚང་ཀ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་བུ་ལ་ཞོན་རྟ་ཞིག་བཅོ་ཡིན །
མི་དེ་སྔོན་མ་ཁྱོང་སྡེ་བུ་ལ་གཟིམ་དཔོན་བཅོ་ཡིན།
དེ་སང་ཏིང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་བུ་ལ་གསོལ་དཔོན་བཅོ་ཡིན །
དེ་སང་རྙིང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་བུ་ལ་ཞིབ་དཔོན་བཅོ་ཡིན།
དེ་སང་རྙིང་མ་མྱོང་སྟེ་བུ་ལ་ཆུ་དཔོན་བཅོ་ཡིན །
དེ་སང་ཉིང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་བུ་ལ་ཤིང་དཔོན་བཅོ་ཡིན །
དེ་སང་རྙིང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་བུ་ལ་སྒོ་སྲུངས་བཅོ་ཡིན །
དེ་སང་རྙིང་མ་ཁྱོང་སྡེ་བུ་ལ་ཁྱི་རྫི་བཙོ་ཡིན །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ལན་དུ་ཇོ་ཇོས་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་བཏངས །
ཁྱེད་ཧོར་ངན་རྩོག་པོས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་རྣ་མེད་བོང་བུས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།

294
ཁྱེད་རུ་བ་མེད་པའི་གླང་ངུ་ཉོན་དང༌ །
དེ་རྟ་མི་ཚང་མ་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཡིན་ལོ།
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་རྒྱལ་བ་ཚང་ཀ་ཡིན་ལོ།
དེ་རྟ་མི་ཚང་མ་ཁྱེད་ལ་མི་ཐེབ་ཅས་ཡིན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་གར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡིད་མ་ཆེས་པས། ཨང་གར་
ལངས་པ་བཙོན་ཁང་ནས་ཕྱིང་སྟེ་འདྲིས་པ། ཨང་གར་ལྕངས་པས་ལེན་དུ་གླུ་
འདི་ལྟར་བཏུངས།
ཁྱེད་བསམ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཧོར་ངན་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན།
དེ་རྟ་པ་ཚང་མ་གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་ཡིན།
གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་ཀ་དེ་ཀུན་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་དཔའ་བོ་མེད་བསམ་མ།
སྔོན་ལ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་མ་ཞིག་ཕུ་ཡིན་ལོ །
དིང་ན་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་ཆུ་ཞིག་བླུག་ཡིན་ལ།
མེ་རེ་ཆུ་ཡིས་བསད་པ་ཞིག་བཅོ་ཡིན་ལོ །
ཁྱེད་ལ་དམག་ཅིག་ཡོད་ན་སྡུས་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་མཁར་ཞིག་མེད་ན་རྩིག་ལོ།
ཁྱེད་ལ་གདམ་གསུམ་ཟེར་བའི་ཟེར་ལོང་མི་ཡོང་།
ཁྱེད་ལ་གོམ་གསུམ་གྱོབ་ལོང་མི་ཡོང་ །

295
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་ཧོར་གུར་དཀར་ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ། ཨང་གར་ལུངས་པ་དེ་
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་དྲ་མིག་ནང་དུ་རྒྱང་སྟེ། མཁར་གྱི་མགོ་ནས་ཆར་ལ་བཏངསྟེ་བོརས།
དེ་ནས་མདའ་དཔོན་གོང་མ་ལྷ་ལ་སོང་བ་སང་། ཨང་གར་ལུངས་པ་ཆར་ལ་
ཡོད་པ་མཐོང༌། མདའ་དཔོན་གྱིས་དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག་ལ་ཟེརས། ཨ་མ་
དཔལ་མོའི་ཨ་སྟག་ལེ། ཨ་མ་རང་ལ་ཨང་གར་ལུངས་པ་ལེན་ཐུབ་ན། ལྕགས་
ཐག་ངས་བཅད་ཐུབ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དཔལ་མོ འི་ཨ་སྟག་གིས་ཁྲུབ་ཡིན་ཟེར་དེ་
ལེནས་པ། མདའ་དཔོན་གྱིས་ལྕགས་ཐག་དེ་བསད་བཏངས་པ] ཨང་གར་ལྕངས་
པ་ཡང་དཔའ་བོའི་བློ་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོས་ཧོར་གྱི་གོས་གོན་ཏེ།
སྤྲུལ་མགོ་མ་ཆབ་རྐྱེན་ནང་དུ་ཆང་ཁུར་ཏེ་ཆང་གི་ནང་དུ་དུག་རྫས་མང་པོ་བཏང་སྟེ།
ཀལ་ཅོར་རོན་དེ་ཁར་ནས། གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་བོའི་མདུན་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར་
བཏངས་སོ།
ངའི་གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཀུན་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལེ། །
གླིང་གི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་ཀས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལེ།
ད་ཕྱི་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཡོད་ཙ་ན་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལི་གོས་ཡོད་པིན།
དག་ས་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་ཧོར་གོས་གོན་དགོས།
ད་ཕྱི་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་ཡོད་ཙ་ན་གོ་ཡུའི་སློག་པ་ཡོད་ཡིན།
དག་ས་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་ཧོར་ཏིབ་གོན་དགོས།
ངའི་ཕྱི་ལ་དཔའ་བོ་ཀུན་ལ་འོབ་རྒྱལ་ཞིག་མགོང་ལོ།
སྤྲུལ་མདོ་ཆབ་རྐྱན་ནང་དུ་སྐྱེམས་ཤིག་ཡོད་ལོ།

296
ང་ཡིས་བཅོས་མཁན་མེན་བཙལ་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཉེ་ཞ་སྐྱེམ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ན་སྐྱེམས་བྲང་ཞིག་འདོན་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང་། མགོང་མ་ནོ་ནས ་ཀོ་རེ་ཕིངས་པ། དེ་ཚུག་པ་
མདའ་དཔོན་མགོང་མ་ལ་དུག་ཡོད་ཅེས་ཤེས་དེ་ཟེརས། ཇོ་ཇོ་ལེ་སྔོན་ལ་སྟེང་ལྷ་
ཡུལ་ལ་ཕུལ། དེ་རྟིང་ན་བར་བཙན་ཡུལ་ལ་ཕུལ། དེ་རྙིང་ན་འོག་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ལ་
ཕུལ། ཕས་ལྷ་ཀེར་ཟང་སྙན་པོ་ལ་ཕུལ། མས་ལྷ་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོ་ལ་ཕུལ།
གླིང་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཕུལ། ཟེར་དེ་མདའི་མགོ་དང་པངས་བཏངས་པ། ས་དོ་
གོམས་གནམ་ལ་སོང་། གནམ་དོ་གོམས་ས་ལ་བུད། དེ་ནས་དཔལ་ལེ་རྒོད་པོ་
ལ་སྲོ་ཡོང་སྟེ་ཇོ་ཇོ་ཟུམ་སྟེ་གླུ་འདི་ལྟར།
ཨོ་ཧོ། དཔལ་ལེ་ངའི་གྲི་ལ་གྲིབ་ཤད་ཅིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
རྒོད་པོའི་གྲི་ལ་གྲི་བཤད་ཅིག་ཡོད་ལོ།
ལོ་གསུམ་སྟེང་གི་ལྷ་ཡུལ་ལ་བོད་པ་ཡིན།
ལྷ་འཁོརགསུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་བཅུའི་ལྷ་བྲིས་ཤིག་འཕོག་པིན།
ལོ་གསུམ་བར་གྱི་བཙན་ཡུལ་ལ་བར་པ་ཡིན།
བཙན་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབས་དུན་མའི་བཙན་བྲིས་ཤིག་འཕྱོག་ཡིན།
ལོ་གསུམ་འོག་གི་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ལ་བོར་པ་ཡིན།
ཀླུ་གསུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་བཅུའི་ཀླུ་བྲིས་ཤིག་འཕོག་ཡིན
ལོ་གསུམ་གངས་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་བོརས་པ་ཡིན།
གངས་ཀྱི་གངས་ངར་ཞིག་འཕོག་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །

༡97
ལོ་གསུམ་བྲག་གི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་བོར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
བྲག་གི་བྲག་ངར་འཕོག་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ལོ་གསུམ་པའི་མཐིལ་ལ་བོར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ།
སའི་ས་ངར་འཕོག་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ལོ་གསུམ་ཆུའི་མཐིལ་ལ་བོར་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལོ །
ཆུའི་ཆུ་ངར་འཕོག་མཁན་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ །
བྱང་ཚ་ཁ་ནས་ཚ་ཞིག་ཁྱོངས་པ་ཡིན།
ཤ་བ་རི་དགས་ཀྱི་ར་གོ་ཁྱོངས་པ་ཡིན།
ལུག་དྲོ་བདག་རུ་ཅོ་ཁྱོངས་པ་ཡིན། །
བྱ་ཁ་ཡུག རྒྱལ་པོ འི་ཤོག་པ་ཞིག་ཁྱོངས།
མཚོ་མོའི་མཐིལ་ནས་ཆུ་གྲང་མོ་ཞིག་ཁྱོངས།
སྟག་ལོ་པ་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱིས་ཐར་ངད་དངས་པ་ཡིན།
འབྲུག་ལོ་མ་བཅོ་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱིས་སྦྱད་པ་ཞིག་ཕུས་པིན།
དེ་ཟུག་ཐར་ངད་དྲག་པོ་ཞིག་བཏངས་ཡིན།
ངའི་གྲི་མ་པིངས་པ་ན་མ་ཡིངས་ལོ །
གླི་པིངས་པ་ནས་པར་ལ་བསད་ཅེས་དེ་མིན་བ་མི་འདུག་ལོ།
ཁོག་སྟོད་ཁྱེ་རི་གླིང་མཁར་ལ་པང་ཡིན།
ཁོག་སྨད་ཁེ་རི་ཀླུ་ཡུལ་ལ་པང་ཡིན།
སྐྱིད་པ་ེ་རི་བང་བཙན་ཡུལ་ལ་པང་ཡིན།
ཁྱོད་ཡབས་སྟན་པའི་བུ་མོ་ཁ་དམར་མོ་ཡིན་ནོག།
28

293
ཡུམ་སྔོན་མོའི་བུ་མོ་ལྕེ་དམར་མོ་ཡིན་ནོག།
ཞིམ་པོ་ཟོས་པའི་ཚིལ་སོགས་མ་ཡིན་ནོག།
ལགས་མོ་གོན་པའི་སྲང་འགྱིང་མོ་ཡིན་ནོག།
ཁྱེད་དེ་ཟུག་མེད་ན་གླིང་མཁར་ཤལ་མ་ལ་སྒྱུརེས་ས
དེ་ཟུག་མེད་ན་གླིང་གི་ཟན་སྙིང་མར་སྙིང་ཚར་ར །
ཁྱེད་དེ་ཟུག་མེད་ན་ནོ་གཅེས་འབུ་དམར་བསདས་ས།
ཁྱེད་དེ་ཟུག་མེད་ན་པོ་ལད་གུད་གཞུ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་བདུངས་ས།
ཁྱེད་དེ་ཟུག་མེད་ན་རྟ་ཕོ་ཁ་ལ་མེ་འབར་ཧོར་ཡུལ་ལ་བསླེབ་བ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་དེ་དཔལ་ལེས་ལག་པ་གཡོན་པ་དང་འདི་གུ་མའི་མགོ་སྤུ་ལ་
འཐུཔས། ལག་པ་གཡས་པ་དང་རྡོ་ ཆོད་མའི་རལ་གྲི་ལ་འཐམ་སྟེ་པིངས་པ།
གོང་མའི་བུ་ཚ་དང༌། ཁ་རྒན་ག་ནི། མདའ་དཔོན་གོང་མ། ཚང་ཀ་ཡོང་སྟེ་
རལ་གྲི་བཏང་མི་བཅུགས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་མཁར་ལ་སོང་སྡེ། གར་དཀར་ལ་
གནས་ཚུལ་ཚང་མཟེརས་པ། དེ་ནས་ཕར་ལ་མགར་ཕྲུག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡན་
མཁར་ལ་ཡོང་མ་བཞུགས་པས། ཡང་མི་སུའང་ཡོང་མ་བཅུག་པར། ཇོ་ཇོ་
དང་གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཕྲུ་ག་ཀུན་ཚང་ཀ་འདུགས། དེ་ནས་གོང་མ་བུ་ཚ་མཁར་
ལ་ལྟ་སྐོར་ལ་སོང་བས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་མཁར་གྱི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་ཡོད་ཚུག། གོང་
མ་བུ་ཚས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ལ་གླུ་ཞིག་བཏངས།
ཨ་ཅེ་ཇོ་ཇོས་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
ཇོ་ ངོ་སོ་མས་བདག་ལ་གསན་ལོ།

259
མཁར་གྱི་མགོ་ལ་པེན་ཞིག་ཅེས་ལ།
དེའི་ཁ་བཡུའི་ཚིག་བུ་ཞིགཙུག་ལོ །
དེའི་ཁ་ཅུ་རུའི་ལག་པ་ཞིག་ཙུག་ལོ།
དེའི་ཁ་མུ་ཏིག་གི་ཀ་ག་ཞིག་བོར་ལོ།
དེའི་ཁ་མེ་ལོང་ཞིག་བོར་ལོ།
དེའི་ཁ་རྒྱུ་ལོང་ཞིག་བོར་ལོ།
དེའི་ཁ་རྒྱ་ཁབ་ཅིག་བོར་ལོ།
དེའི་ཁ་ཉུང་དཀར་ཞིག་བོར་ལོ།
དེའི་ཁ་རྡ་རྙོག་ཅིག་བོར་ལོ།
བུ་ཚ་ང་རང་གིས་མདའ་ཞིག་བཏང་ཡིན།
འཕོག་ཡིན་ན་མི་འཕོག་ཚོད་ཅིག་རང་ལྟེན་ལོ །
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་སང་། ཇོ་ངོས་ཟེར་མཁན་ནང་ལྟར་བཅོས་པ། གོང་མ་བུ་
ཚས་མདའ་ཞིག་བཏངས། དེ་ཚང་མའི་དཀྱིལ་ལ་ཕོག་སྟེ། ཚང་མ་ས་ལ་འགྱུར་
སོང༌། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ ཇོ མགྱོགས་པ་ཡོང་སྟེ། གར་དཀར་ལ་ཟེརས། གུར་དཀར་
འཇིགས་སྟེ། དམག་སྐུལ་བཏང་སྟེ་གླིང་པ་དང་འཐབ་མོ་བཏངས། ཧོར་གྱི་
དམག་ཚང་མ་གླིང་པས་ཅིག་ཀྱང་མེད་མཁན་བཙོ་སྡེ་བསད་བཏངས པས། གར་
དཀར་དང་ཇོ་ ངོས་ཟེརས། ད་ཅི་བསོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། གུར་དཀར་གྱིས་མགར་
ཕྲུག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡན་ལ་ཡོང་ཟེར། ཟེར་ཏེ་མི་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་མགར་སྡུག་
ཡོངས། གར་དཀར་གྱིས། བླ་མགར་ཕྲུག་སེང་གེ་དོན་ལྡད། གླིང་པའི་
དཔག་གིས་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་གཅིག་ཀྱང་མེད་མཁན་བཅོས། ད་ཁོ་རང་ལ་འབད་

300
ཅིག་ཡོད་ན་སོས་ཟེརས་པ། མགར་ཕྲུག་གིས་ཐོ་རས་ལ་ང་ཉན་ནོག་ག་ལྟེན་
ཟེརས་པས། གར་དཀར་འཐད་སོང་། དེ་ནས་མགར་ཕྲུག་དེ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོང་སྟེ།
མཚན་ལ་གླིང་པའི་དམག་འབྲང་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་དཔའ་བོ་ཀན་ལ་ཟེརས་པ། ལྔ་དཔའ་
བོ་ཀུན་ཐོ་རས་ལ་ང་ཧོར་གྱི་དམག་བཅོ་སྡེ་ཁྱེ་ཞ་རང་ལ་འཐབ་མོ་བཏང་ཡིན།
ངས་ཤིང་གི་རལ་གྲི་ཞིག་ཁར་སྡེ་རེ་རེ་བཏང་ཡིན། ཁྱེད་ཀུན་གྱིས་ཤི་རྫུན་ཅོས།
དེ་ནས་མཚན་སོང་བ་དང་ལངས་དེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་ཤིག། ཇོ་ཇོ་ང་རང་གཅིག་
ཅིག་ལ་ཉན་ཡིན་ཟེརས! དེ་ནས་ཁོ་ལོག་སྟེ་ཡོངས། ཐོ་རས་ཚུག་པོ་ལ་ཁོ་
མཁར་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཧོར་གྱི་ཁྲབ་རྨོག་གོན་ཏེ་རལ་གྲི་ཁུར་ཏེ། ཧོར་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་
རྟ་རྐང་གསུམ་ལ་ཞོན་ཏེ་གླིང་པའི་དམག་འབྲང་ལ་སོང་སྟེ་འཐབ་མོ་བཏོངས།
རལ་གྲི་དེ་ཤིང་ལ་འགྱུར་བཅུག་སྟེ་གླིང་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་ལ་རེ་རེ་བཏངས་
པ་སང་། དཔའ་བོ་ཚང་མ་མལ་མལ་ལ་ཤི་རྫུན་བསྒྲུབས། ཧོར་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་རྟ་
རྐང་གསུམ་དེ་ཤི་མཁན་བཙོ་སྡེ་གླིང་པའི་དམག་འབྲང་ལ་བོར་ཏེ། ཁོ་རང་
མཁར་ལ་ཡོངས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་ཁོ་ཡོང་མ་བཅུགས།
No. 5,
དེ་ནས་ཁོ་མགར་ཁང་དུ་ཡོང་སྟེ་འདུགས། གླིང་པ་ཚང་མས་མཚན་སོང་བ་
སང༌། ཧོར་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་རྟ་རྐང་གསུམ་ཁྲིད་དེ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་མགར་
དྲུག་ཐང་རྙེད་ཀྱིས་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སྒམ་ཞིག་བཅོ་འིན་འདུགས། ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སྐམ་དེ་
འགྲུབ་སྟེ་ན། ཞཀ་དང་ཞུགས་པ་བིང་བ་བཅོ་འིན་ཞིག་འདུགས] ཨ་བས་
ཟེརས། ལྦ་བུ་ཚ་ཟླ་ཅེས་ལ་ཡོང༌། དེ་ནང་ན་ཅི་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། བུ་ཚས་
ཟེརས། འདི་ནང་ནལྷ་ཡུལ་དང་མི་ཡུལ་མཐོང་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བས་ང་

301
གཅིག་ཞུགས་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། བུ་ཚས་རྒྱལ་ཟེར་ཏེ་ཨ་བྲ་སྒམ་མི་ནང་དུ་བཏང་
སྡེ་ཀཱ་ལིག་སྲན་ཏེ་བཅུགས། ཨ་བས་ཟེརས། ལྦ་བུ་ཚ་འདིའི་ནང་ན་རང་མཐོང་
བ་མི་འདུག་ཟེརས་པ ། བུ་ཚས་ཙ་ཐིག་སྙིང་སྟེ་ནས་མཐོང་ཡིན་ཟེར་རིན་ཞིག་སྐྱིད་
བུ་བཙོ་སྟེ་སྒམ་དེ་བཀལ་ཏེ་མེ་ཕུ་སྟེ་སྦྱད་པ་བཏངས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་བྲ་ལ་ཚན་ཏེ་
ཆོར་ཏེ། ལྔ་བུ་ཚ་ཅི་བཅོ་འདུ་ཟེརས། བུ་ཚས་ཨ་བ་རང་ལ་ལྷ་ཡུལ་དང་མི་
ཡུལ་མཐོང་བཅུག་གེད་ལ་ཟེརས། དེ་ཚུག་པ་ལྕགས་སྒམ་ཚ་སྡེ་ཚན་ཏེ་སོང་བ་
སང་། ཨ་བ་ལ་ཤེས་ཏེ་ཟེརས། ལྔ་བུ་ཚ་ང་བསད་མ་བསད་ཟེརས་པ། བུ་
ཚས་ཟེརས། ངས་ཟེར་མཁན་བཅོ་ཡིན་ན། ཨ་བས་ཁྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཅི་ཟེར་མཁན་
ངས་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། བུ་ཚས་གསེར་པོ འི་གསེར་མཁར་གྱི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་སླེབ་
ཅས་སི་ལྕགས་ཐག་བཅོ་ན་ཕུད་ཡིན་ཟེརས་པ། ཨ་བས་བཅོ་ཡིན་ཟེརས། དེ་
ནས་སྐམ་མི་ནང་ནས་ཕིངས། དེ་ནས་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀས་ལྕགས་ཐག་བཅོས །
མཚན་ཉི་མ་བཅོས་པ་བཅོ་ ཚར ། །
དེ་ནས་མགར་ཕྲུག་གིས་ལྕགས་ཐག་ཁར་ཏེ་གསེར་པོ འི་གསེར་མཁར་གྱི་
རྩ་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། སྣེ་མོ་ལ་པུར་ཆ་ཞིག་བདག་སྟེ་མཁར་གྱི་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་ཕངས་པ།
པུར་ཚ་དེ་ཁ་དོག་ལ་འཁད་དེ་སྲན་ཏེ་སོང་བས། ཁོ་ལྕགས་ཐག་ལ་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ་སོང་
སྟེ་ཕྱེད་ཟམ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ་སང་༑ ནམ་མཁའ་ནས་བྱ་དཀར་ཞིག་དང་བྱ་ནག་གཅིག་
འཁྲིལ་ལི་ཡོངས་པ། བྱ་དཀར་དེ་བུད་དེ་ཡོངས་པ། དེ་དང་མཉམ་བོ་ཁོ་ཡང་
བུད་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནི་བཀུར་དམན་མོས་ཟེརས་པ། z་ཀེ་སར་ཁྱེད་ལ་མགོར་
གྲིབ་ཕོག་སྟེ་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེར་ཏེ། ཨ་ནེས་ཁྲུས་མང་པོ་བཏང་སོང་། དེ་ནས་ཁོ་
སོང་སྟེ་སྨོན་ལམ་བཏབ་སྟེ་ན་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ་སོང་བ། མཁར་བ་དེ་ཁ་ཐོག་ལ་བསླབ་སོང་

802
བས། ཁོས་པོ་ཙེ་ཁ་ཅིག་ཁྱོངས། བི་ལ་ཞིག་ཁྱུང་སྟེ། བར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོའི་
མལ་ཙའི་ནང་བཏང་སྟེ་པི་ཚེ་ཤོར་བཅུགས། བི་ལ་འདེད་བཅུགས། གར་དཀར་
ལ་གཉིད་ཡོང་མ་བཙུགས། ཐོ་རས་ཚུག་པོ་ལ་ཁབ་པོན་གྲོ་གཅིག་ཁར་དེ་ཁོ་རང་
སོང་སྟེ་གསེར་རལ་ཅན་དང་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་གྱི་གཟུགས་པོ་ལ་བཙུག་སྟེ་མཚན་
ཚེ་རེ་གཉིད་ལོང་མ་བཅུགས། གནམ་ལང་སྡེ་ན། དཀར་ཁུང་ནང་ནས་ན་མེན་ནི་ཇ་
ལའི་ཁ་གསེར་གདུབས་པོ་པངས་བཏངས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ འི་མཛུ་ག་ལ་འཁད་སོང་
བས། ངོ་ ཇོས་ད་ཀེ་སར་བསླེབ་ཚར་ཧོར་ངན་ཁྱོད་ལོངས་ཟེརས་པ། ཧོར་དེ་
ལང་སྡེ་གོན་ཅེས་གོན་ཚར་རེ་དང་། ཀེ་སར་བིང་སྡེ་འཁྲིལས། དེ་ནས་ཨ་ནེ་
བཀར་དམན་མོས་ལྔ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་ག་མ། ཀེ་སར་གྱི་རྐང་ཡོག་ལ་རྣལ་ལི་བག་པེ་
ཏོང༌། ཧོར་གྱི་ནང་ཡོག་ལ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སྲན་མ་ཧོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་ཀེ་སར་
ནི་མདའ་དར་དཀར་མོའི་གྲོགས་ཡིན། གུར་དཀར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ནི་བུ་སྐྱེས་སི་གྲོགས་
ཡིན་ཟེར་དེ་གཉིས་ཀ་སྲེ་སྟེ་གཡོགས་བཏངས་པ། ཨ་ནེ་བཀར་དམན་པོ་བྱ་ཞིག་
ལ་རྫསྟེ་ ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སྲན་མ་བསྡུ་སྟེ་ཧོར་གྱི་རྐང་ཡོག་ལ་བཏབས། རྣལ་ལི་བག་ཕེ་
བསྡུ་སྟེ་ཀེ་སར་གྱི་རྐང་ཡོག་ལ་བཏངས་པ། ཧོར་གྱིས་མུ་ཟ་གོན་ཏེ་ཡོད་པ་སོང་།
ལྕགས་ཀྱི་སྲན་མའི་ཁ་ན་འདྲེད་ནས་ས་ལ་གྱེལ་སོང་བས། ཀེ་སར་ཧོར་གྱི་བྲང་
ཇི་ཁ་བིང་སྟེ། བདུག་པ་ཅན་གྲི་པིངས་པ། ཧོར་གྱིས་གླུ་བཏངས།།
རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ངའི་དངོས་ལ་ཉོན་ལོ།
ལྷའི་བུ་ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བདག་ལ་གསན་དང་ །
ང་ལ་མ་ཤེས་པ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།
ང་ལ་མི་མགས་པ་རིག་སོང་ལོ།

303
ཉིད་ཀྱིས་བག་སྲིས་ཤིག་རྣམས་འང་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོ།
ཉིད་ཀྱིས་བག་སྲིས་ཤིག་རྣམས་འང་སྤྲུལ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ།
གླིང་ཡུལ་བསིལ་མོ་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ་དབྱར་ས་རིག་བཅོ་ཡིན་ལོ།
ཧོར་ཡུལ་གྲོན་མོ་རིག་ཡིན་ལོ་དགན་ས་རིག་བཅོ་ཡིན་ལ།
ང་མ་བསད་རྒྱལ་ལྷམ་ཆེན་མོ་བག་སྲིས་ཤིག་རྣམས་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེར་ཅེས་འཐོང་སྟེ་ཀེ་སར་ལ་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཚོར་དེ་མི་བསད་བསམ་པ།
ཨ་ནི་བཀུར་དམན་རྒྱལ་མོས་ཟེརས་པ། ལྔ་སྟོང་ཅན་ནི་སྟངས་མེད་གེ་སར་རྒྱལ་
པོ། གླིང་མཁར་ཤལ་མ་བསྒྱུརས་པའི་ཡིད་དུ་ཡོང་བ་མི་རག་ག། གླིང་གི་ཤ་
སྙིང་མར་སྙིང་ཟིན་སྙིང་ཚང་མ་ཚར་བཅུགས། ནོར་བུ་རིགས་ཚང་མ་ཧོར་ཡུལ་
ལ་བསླེབ་བཅུགས་པའི་ཡིད་དུ་ཡོང་བ་མི་རག་ག། གྲི་ག་སོར་གསུམ་འགལ་བ་
མི་རག་ག། ཇོ་ ཇོ་འབྲུ་གུ་མ་བཀོགས་པའི་ཡིད་དུ་ཡོང་བ་མི་རག་ག། དེ་ཟུག་
ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་དུག་པ་ཅན་གྲི་གུ་དང་ཧོར་གྱི་གྲོད་པ་དེ་ཤགོས། དེ་ནས་
ཀེ་སར་ཚིལ་གྱི་ནང་དུ་ནུབ་སྟེ་སོང་བས། ཨ་ནེ་བཀུར་དམན་མོས་གསོལ་མཆོད་
ཅིག་བཏང་སྟེ་གླུ་ཞིག།
སྟེང་ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་རྒྱབ་བཞིན་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
བར་བཙན་གྱི་ཨ་མ་སྐྱབ་མདན་མ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
འོག་ཀླུའི་ཀླུ་རྒྱལ་རྫོགས་པ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ལྷ་དག་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
མཉམ་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཀླུ་དག་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
པས་ལྷ་ཀེར་ཟོང་སྙན་པོ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།

804
མས་ལྷ་བཀར་དམན་གྱལ་མོ་ལ་མཆོད་དོ།
ཁྱེད་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ཧོར་གྱི་ཤ་ཚིལ་འདོན་དགོས་ལོ།
དེ་ཟུག་ཟེརས་པ་ཧོར་གྱི་ཤ་ཚིལ་ཚང་མ་སླེབ་ཅིག་ལ་ཚར་སོང་བས། རུས་
པ་ཁ་ཅིག་ལུས་པ། ལང་གར་ཞིག་བཅོསྟེ་བོརས། དེ་ནས་གསེར་རལ་ཅན་དང་
གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་གཉིས་ཀ་ལ། གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་གུལ་ཟེརས་པ། མི་ཆ་ཟེརས།
དེ་ནས་གསེར་པོ འི་གསེར་མཁར་དང་། ལྕགས་ཀྱི་གུང་སྐོར་ཚང་མ་ཤིགས།
ནོར་བུ་ཚང་མ་ཁྱོངས། གསེར་རལ་ཅན་དང་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་བོར་ཏེ། ཇོ ཇོ་དང་
ཀེ་སར་ཡོངས།
No. 9.
དེ་ནས་བྲག་ཚའུ་དུང་དུང་མཐོང་བ་སང༌། ཀེ་སར་ལ་ཡིད་དུ་ཡོང་སྟེ་
ཟེརས། ངའི་རྟ་ལྕག་དེ་ལུས་དོག་ང་འཁྱོང་བ་ཆེན་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་ཟེརས།
ཉེ་རང་གིས་ངའི་ཕྲ་ག་ཀུན་བསད་པ་ཡིན་ནོག་ཟེར་དེ་ཆ་མ་བཅུགས་པས། ཀེ་
སར་གྱིས་ཟེརས་། ང་རལ་གྲི་དང་མི་བསད་དུ་བག་མི་བཏང་ཟེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོ་
བདེན་ཆེ་སྟེ་ཆ་བཅུགས། དེ་ནས་ཀེ་སར་ཕྲུ་ག་ཀུན་གྱི་སྒོ་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཟིརས།
z་གསེར་རལ་ཅན་དང་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་གཉིས་ཀ། ངའི་རྟ་ལྕག་དེ་ལུས་དོག་དོང་
ཟེརས་པ། ཕྲུ་གུ་གཉིས་ཀས་ཨ་བའི་ཀ་ལེ་ལ་ཆ་ཅེས་ལ་ཤུ་གའི་མི་ནང་གང་
བཅོ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཁོང་རང་གིས་དུ་བག་གི་སྨན་བཅོ་འིན་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཀེ་
སར་ལ་ཟེརས། ཉེ་རང་ལོན་བ་ཡོང༌། ང་ཞུ་ལ་ལོང་མེད་ཟེརས་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་
ཡང་དོང་ཟེརས་པ། ཁོང་གིས་བལྟས་པ་རྡོ་ལྕག་དེ་མ་སྨིན་ཏེ་ཞིག་ཡོད་ཚུག།

306
ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀས་ཨ་མ་དུ་ལི་ལ་ཁྱོང་སྟེ་སྒོ་ལ་བསླེབ་པ། ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་བསམ།
ཁོང་མཚོན་ཆ་དང་བསད་ན། ངས་མནའ་བོར་མཁན་ཡིན། དེ་སང་རྟ་ལྕག་དང་
བསད་ཡིན་བསམ་སྟེ། རྡོ་ལྕག་དང་ཁོང་གཉིས་ཀའི་མགོ་ཀུན་བཅད་དེ་ཁར་ཏེ་
ཁྱོངས། དེ་ནས་ཇོ་ཇོ་བྲག་ཚའུ་དུང་དུང་ལ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་ཡོད་ཚུག། ཀེ་སར་
ཇོ་ཇོའི་མདན་ལ་ཙ་ཐིག་མ་བསླེབ་པ་ཟེརས། ལྟོས་ཇོ་ཇོ་ངས་བྲག་ཚའུ་དང་
དང་ལ་ལྟ་སྟེ་གྲྭ་ཕོག་ཅིག་བཏང་ཡིན་ཇེརས་པ། ཇོ་ཇོས་བལྟས་པ། གསེར་
རལ་ཅན་དང་གཡུ་རལ་ཅན་གཉིས་ཀའི་མགོ་ཀུན་ལ་གྲྭ་ཕོག་བཏངས། ཇོ་ ཇོ་ལ་
དེ་ཟུག་ཤེས་དེ་མུན་སོང་བས། ཡང་ཇོ་ངོས་ཟེརས་པ། ཝཀེ་སར་ཕོད་པ་ཅན།
ད་ནས་ཕར་ལ་ཁྱེད་དང་ངའི་བར་ལ་ཕྲུ་གུ་མ་སྐྱེས་ཤིག་ཟེར་ཏེ་ནས། ཁོང་བྲག་
སྒོ་ནས་བིང་སྟེ་སོང་། དེ་ནས་སྔོན་ལ་སྦ་ལུ་ཡོད་པའི་ས་ཁྱོད་ལ་བསླེབ་སོང༌།
དེ་ནས་ཕར་ལ་ཇོ་ཇོ་བུའི་རྔ་མ་ལ་བཏག་སྟེ་བ་སྤྱད་གྱིན་ཞིག་ཁྱེརས། གླིང་ཡུལ་
མ་བསླེབ་སྟེ་མཁར་ལ་སོང་སྟེ། ཇོ་ཇོ་གླིང་ཡུལ་ལ་མཐོང་ཀོལ་ལ་ལོ་གསུམ་
བཏངས། ལོ་གསུམ་མགོའི་ཁ་འོལ་བ་དབ་སྟེ། མཛོ་དང་རྨོས། ལོ་གསུམ་
བུགས་མོ་ལ་ཀོ་བ་བཏབ་སྟེ་མཁར་གྱི་ལས་ལ་བཀོལས། ལོ་གསུམ་སྲག་པའི་
ར་རྫི་བཅོས། ལོ་གསུམ་སེན་ཏིག་གི་འོ་མ་ཞོ་བཅུགས། དེ་ཟུག་གིས་
ལོ་བཅོ་ལྔ་བུད་སོང༌། མཁར་ལ་ཞིག་གསོབ་བཅོ་བ་ལ་ལོ་གཅིག་སོང་། དེ་ནས་
ཀེ་སར་གྱིས་ཇོ་ཇོ་འབྲུག་མ་སྔོན་མའི་མཆོགས་སེ་ཇོ་ ཇོ་བཅོ་ སྟེ་མཚན་གསུམ།
ཉིན་གསུམ་དྲུག་བག་སྟོན་བཏང་ཛིན་ཞིག་བདེ་སྐྱིད་སྤུན་གསུམ་ཚོགས་མཁར་དུ་
འདུགས་སོ།།
[། མཐའ །]

TALE No. VII.
DEFEAT OF THE KING OF HOR .
ABSTRACT OF Contexts.
1.
Keger was alone on the way to Hor. He found the road blocked
by thorns, Lonicera, mother-willows and tamarieke. All these ohstacles
were overcome with the assistance of helpers from gLing, who were called
there through prayers. When Kobar lay down for his night-real, at the
Srar-pans, Ane bkur dmanmo showed him a terrifying spectacle of nature,
to try his courage. He heard wolves and fores howl, and dry menure
and little stones were blown about by the storm . He became quiet
when he knew that Ane bkur dmanmo had caused the storm . Then ho
ate the magic food , received from her in a ppt-shell, which could never be
Consumed. On the ascent, Kesar sang a song of all the animals which
lose their strength on the page, and asked Ane bkur dmanmo to assist
him . She sont him & fox to lead him acrosa.
After seven days Kegar met an outpost of dwarfs who were play
ing et dice. They bad put up & hat on . post, and this hat used to
dat
bad 
whirl round whenever a person drew near. Although Kenar 
Kesar had put
the
on hia in vigible cap, the hat began to 
whirlwhirl, , and 
and the dwarfs, who could
anemomto 
not see anybody, became became angry. They said : “ The bat does not liko
as to play all day long, and therefore moves about." Then they took the
hat down, and Korar showed his true belf. He played at dice with the
dwarts and lost everything, for a female dwerf bad taken hor geat inside
one of the dice. When Kesar had to stake his life, Ang bkur dmanmo
advised him to bore with his needle into one of the dice. When doing
80, the dwarf-woman left the dice, and Kesar played on with his own
dice. Now he wou and said, he would take the life of the dwarfs which
he had gained . To reconcile him , the dwarfs ordered their stick which
had the power of providing everything, to bring the roost precious goods
from all the surrounding countries. When they had arrived, Kesar
asked all the gods, etc.; who were born with him , to devour the goods
I The same soene we find in the Shek-version before Kesar's start to the north.
Compare Ladakhi Songe, No. XXY.
3 This rorainda as of Nula's story.

307
at once. Now Kesar threatened to take the lives of the dwarfs if they
would not become his guides on the way. To this they agreed.
2 .
The dwarf and Regar arrived at the rock Theau dung dung. This
was a door of rocks which closed and opened at the request of the
dwarfa. Wben the dwarf, who showed Kegar the way, asked the door
to open for him , Kedar rode through it as quickly as he could. But
the door, recognizing 
Kesar, closed at once and caught the tail of
Kasar's horse. This was not given free, until Kesar had promised to
bring the heads of the two children of the King of Hor on his way
back. Then they arrived at a place where stones flew about between
beaven and earth, and later on before the yak ' brown sugar.'1 The
dwarf told this yak that Keser would play tricks on him , and the yak
devoured Keger at once. After Kegar had remained inside the yak for
some time, he was advised by Ane bkur dmanmo to use his knife to meke
# way out. Thus the yak was killed.
Kesar was augry with the dwarf and threatened to use him as a
riding-yak with a nose-ring. But the dwarf aggored Kesar that the
rest of the road was not dangerous, and therefore he was sent home.
Then Kesar arrived at a place where nine bridges were tied together,
and where 100 soldiers of Hor had to keep watch. Kegar took the shape
of a young lama, and caused much rain to fall. He made friends with tlie
soldiers and built a house for them , the roof of which rented on a single
pont. One night when much rain fell, he tied & silk cord to the post,
went outside, and tore the post down. All the soldiers were slain by
the falling roof,
When Kesar arrived on the height of the Asalsal-page, le had 100
riders in front of him and 100 ridere behind him ; when he came to the
Along-plain , he had ono rider in front of him , and one rider behind him .
He turned up his sleeves three times, and the golden castle of Hor shook
three times. Then he met the goat-berde of Hor, whom he told a
" I am very much inclined to explain the door of rock, which opens and closes
of its own socord, a a development from the opening and closing of the ice on
floor and laken in 
winter. I am lend to this explanation by 
the fact that in con .
noction with the gute also hailestones (the stones Aying about between besten und
marth), and perhaps • block of ice, the yok 'browa sugar,' are mentioned. The
lako und rivers are the gates to the underworld, the realm of the kiu ; and also in
other mythologies we find a similar gate at the entrauce to the underworld or reala
the dead.

808
wad story about the ruin of Kesar and his family. When the herdomen,
who had been stolen from gling, cricd, he showed them his true self.
3.
Kesar arrived in the land of Hor in the disguise of a beggar. There
were four wells, one for the King of Hor, of gold ; one for the Hor-lama,
of copper ; one for a'Bruguma, of turquoise ; one for the smith of Hor,
of iron. He boiled them all with old shoes, old cups, etc., and lay down
in the road. At first thu king's water-bearer arrived at the well. She
had to jump over Kesar, because he would not make way. Next a'Bru
guma's water-bearer came to fetch water, and the beggar dropped a ring
in her water-vengel. This ring went on a'Brugumas finger, when she
was washing her hande. Then a'Bruguma, having put on her dress of
gLing, went before the beggar to ask him about her friends in gling,
The beggar said that Kesar bad died, and gave a full description of the
stúpa erected in his memory, and of the rewards given to the lamas
He also said , that her father's corpge was left on a plain, and that her
mother was asking almg 'aBruguma was sorry on account of this news
but thonght that the beggar was Kegar.
Finally, the water-bearer of the amith Himie came to the well. She
recognized in the beggar the same man whom she had seen riding across
the Asalsal-page with a retinue, and who had caused the castle of Hor to
shake by waving his sleevos. Kenar told the girl that there had been
100 lica in front of him , and 100 bebind him , and that he had waved his
sleeves only because he was so ploased to see a village after the desert.
He also said that he was the son of smith Himis, but the latter, when
arriving at the well, denied the fact.
One day, when the emitli's daughter went to the pea-field, she saw
the same beggar in it, eating peas and vomiting what he bad enten,
She went to tell her fatber, who came carrying the huge hammer and
* pair of tonge. However, the beggar had already restored everything,
and the field was more beautiful than it had been before. The father,
believing his daughter to be a liar, tore out her cheeks with the tongs,
and buat ber with the huge hemmor.
The rmith said to Rosar, the begrir : “ If you are my son really,
you will be able to recognize my tools among the tools of 100 other
amitha." The boy was able to do so, becaUSO Ane bkur dmarmo helped
him by sitting dowo in the shape of golden fly on every tool wbich
ww Himis' property. According to her advice the boy said : “ The big

809
hammer and the big tongs are missing !" This was actually the case
and Kesar was accepted as the smith's son.
One day lady 'a Bruguma went to the smith to have a golden orna
ment made. The new boy of the anith went before her dandy, having
takon his cap off. He was blamed for this by the emith, bat replied ,
that whoever takes off his but in gLing receives a piece of white cloth.'
There were, borover, no couls ready, and Kesar and the sraith's danghter
were sent together to the wood, to make charcoal. They were ordered
not to cat any wood from the holy forest of the king of Hor. Kegar
destroyed the wbole holy forest of the King of Hor, and on his way
home, when crossing a brook, he said : “ The shoes of the donkeys (who
carried the charcoal) will become wet," and cut the hoofs off. Again
the girl ran to her father to complain ; but because everything was in
good order on his arrival, the girl received a punishment once more.
On the next day Indy ' Bruguma went again to the smithy, and
Kener caused the golden ornament to get lost. Then he canned it to be
found onderneath lady 'a Bruguma. Now he made a great noise, calling
her a thief. a'Bruguma's maid -gervant gave him a box on the ear for
bis impudence, so that his cap fell down. There the mark on his head
could be seen, and 'a Bruguma recognized Kegar. He said that he
would make the ornament, and did so , calling all the gods to his assis
tance.
5 .
Then 'aBruguna and the king of Ror agreed t call together all the
heroes of Hor and let then try the famous bow . If the boy of smith
Himia would be able to bend it, there would be no doubt that he was
really Kenar. To prevent the boy from going to the tournament, Aimia
gave him a great number of arrow heads to sharpen . The boy, how
ever, finished this work in no time, and went to the Assembly, where
the minister " Nine-lives" bad just been able to bend the bow as much
An a barley-corn's breadth , The boy prayed that the famona bow might
go to gLing and another bow be given him , [ This took place apparent
ly.] Then Kesar bent the bow in auch a way that it broke and its frag
ments killed the heroes of Hor, whilst the bow .string caught the king of
Hor's neck so that he was almost choked . Only Kesar was able to re.
lease him from it.
This is the costom at burials and at weddinge. A white cloth is worn on the
CAP. At weddioge it is perhape due to the idea tbat at the wedding tbe virgin dies.
Wbito is apparently the colonr of mourning.
Doon tbie mark on the crown of his head show the influence of Buddhist art?

310
On the next day there was a great wrestling match, and the
strongest wrestler was the minister " Nine-lives." The smith, who
wished to keep the boy at home, gave him great number of needles to
sharpen. The boy finished this work in no time, wrestled with the
minister and killed him . .
On the third day all the people assembled to see who would be able
to ride on the horse Khula melabar. It was so high, that nine stirraps
lend up to its back . The smith told his boy to watch the house, to
provent him from coming. The boy brought the whole house on
his shoulders to the sporting place and said , he would watch it there,
He at once mounted the horse, rode on it head to tail, and up to the sky
to the glang land. There he exchanged it for an ordinary horse, rode
up to the sky again , and let the horse drop so that it was smashed.
Now the lama of Hor had a dream , foreboding the death of the
king and other sad events. Before the king and 'aBruguma had finished
their council about the dream , the Ague of g Ling arrived on the Srar
pres, and Agu dPalle shot an arrow which hit the beam , that was the
king of Hor's heart-artery. Nobody was able to extract the arrow,
oxcept the young smith (Kesar), and he did it only after 'a Bruguma
had prayed for the destruction of the king of Hor. This arrow, after
baving broken all the arrows of Hor, went back to dPallo's quiver.
The king of H r wished to send a spy to see if the army of gLing
wag approaching. she liked the smith's boy ( Kemar) very much ,
he sent him . The daughter of the smith went to warn the king,
but was sent home in disgrace. Therefore she told Kesar to destroy
the altare of white, red, and black colour on the road, because they
wore the altars of Lhayrl, Barbtsan, and Kintyrl, and to houour &
brown (smtypo) altar, because that was the altar of Hor ! He did
exactly the opposite. At a certain place the road was very partor
and the 40 men of Hor, who accompanied him , could hardly walk.
There Kesar put on his invisible cap, and throw all the forty into the
river.
Tbe seven Agus had arrived on the Starstar-pass. Kegar sent
them a I-tter with his horse. Then he remained hidden, so that only
the tip of his hat, an end of his bow , and an arrow -notch could be
seen. First of all he was discovered by Aga Taba miggi rab, but Aga
d Palle would not believe. When Agu d Palle finally saw him , Agu
Gongma buther was sent against the apy of Hor. Keanr, taking the
shape of a pigeon, fled, and Gongma brethsa pursued him , taking the

811
nhape of a falcon. Suddenly Kenar took the shape of a mouse, and
went into a hole of the ground, the Agu following him in the shape
of & weasel. Bat Gongma butkea, having become tired, went back to
the encampment.
Then dPalmoi astag, the female Aga, went off to catch the spy
of Hor. Kesar took the shape of a deer, and the Aga followed in the
shape of a dog. Then Kesar fled in the shape of & fish, and the Aga
followed in the shape of an otter. Again Kesar took the shape of *
goat, and the Agu that of & wolf. After all, the horse of the Aga,
being tired out, threw her off, wben she was beating him . Then she
monoted Kyang rgod dbyerpa, against the advice of the other Agus,
When she came riding on his own borse, Kegar showed his true self.
The Agn, however, was in bad tamper and gave Kesar a lesson, saying,
that through his forgetfalnebs great nisery had come to the land of
gLing.
7.
Kobar went back to the king of Hor, and told him to prepare for
war. The seven Agua, dPalle, Gani, Gongma buthsa, ITaba miggi rab,
Na yyu rna rtsal, mDa dpon gongma end d Palmoi astag, arrived seven
days after Kesar, riding on horses, and leading horges behind them .
The king of Hor wished to buy the borges and to take the men in his
service. When a Bruguma told him that the apparent horse-merchants
were the heroes of gling, he would not believe. Therefore he released
Agu Angar Itsangspa from prison and asked him the same question,
When the Agu gave the same agswer, the king became angry and pat
the Aga in an iron cage, which was hanging down from the castle
to balf the height of the walls. Then mDa dpon gongma divided the
rope with an arrow, and d Palmon astag received the cage with the Agu
when it fell down.
Now a Bruguma tried to poison the Agns with poisoned beer, but
mDs dpon gongma knew at once that it was poisoned ; therefore he
threw the vessel with his arrow np to the sky. Then a piece of earth
flew up to the sky, and a piece of sky fell dowo to the earth (68 a sign
that it was poison). Then dPalle rgodpo, after having praised his arms,
advanced to kill 'aBruguma, but was hindered by three of the Agus.
'aBruguma went to the castle, and told the king all what had happened ,
1 A similar scene we find in Ladakhi Songe, No. XXVI.
- This net of seven Agus is probably a more original set of them than the set of
18 Agus, n we have it in the preface. These seven Agus geern to be of a nome.
what similar type of figures to the helpers in saub folklore AB " Secbse Kowmen
durch dil ganze Wull."

812
Then they resolved not to leave their castle again, and not to allow the
son of the smith to enter it. Gongma buthea (probably mDa dpon
gongwa originally) told 'uBruguma who was on the top of the castle,
to pile op a heap of articles with a horse-bair on the top. He then
sont an arrow into the middle of all of them and destroyed them all.
Then the men of gling killed the whole army of Hor. When the
young omith (Keser) wag gent against them , there was a sham -fight with
wooden words. Kesar once more sent the Agae home, saying, that
bo alone would be able to retake 'a Bruguma.
8.
The boy went back to the smithy and made a boz, into which he
kept jamping in and ont. Himis asked wby he was doing so, and tbe
boy said that from inside the box lhayul and miyul could be seen. The
father wished to try, but as soon as he had got into the box, the boy
locked it and lit a fire anderneath. He did not open , antil Himis bad
promised to assist him in making an iron rope, which could be thrown
to the top of the Hor castle.
Then Kesar carried the rope to the castle of Hor and threw it up.
The iron hook caught hold, and Kegar climbed up. When he had
reached about half the height of the castle, he saw & white and a black
bird fight with each other. The white bird was defeated, and together
with bim Kesar fell down to the ground. Ane bkur dmanmo knew that
several stains from the smitby, left on Kesar's body, were the reason
of his misfortune. She washed bim and sent him up again . He
succeeded, and then he caught mice and a cat which he sent into the
king of 
Hor's bed, to prevent him from sleeping. During the next
night he pricked the children of the king with needles and kept the whole
family awake. Next morning he let his ring drop, and it went by
itself on a'Bruguma's finger. Then a'Bruguma called up the king, and
he rose to wrestle with Kesar, Ane blut Imanmo told a'Bruguma to
throw hard peas under the king of 
Hor's feet, and pap under Kesar's
feet, but 'aBruguma would not do so 
because, although Kesar was
her legal spoube, she had borne children to the king of Hor. 'a Bruguma
bad mixed peas and pap, bat bkur dmann , in the shape of a fowl
separated them again, and the king of Hor was defeated,
He asked Kesar to spare his life, and offered all his land instead,
Kesar was willing to let him live, but Ane bkur dmanmo reminded him
1 According to the Khalutae-version (coutinuation of the Shoh -version) he
threatens to throw the box in the atør.

818
once more of all the sins of Hor, and therefore he was killed with '
poisoned knife. When he was stabbed, a tremendous amount of fat
came pouring out of him , and Kesar would have been drowned in it,
118d not Ane blur dmanmo offered it all to the gods, etc. The children
of the king of Hor would not accompany Kesar, although the castle
was destroyed and all the treasures carried away.
When Kesar and 'aBruguma arrived at the door Tsau dung dung,
Kenar remembered that the heads of the two children were required to
induce the door to open of its own accord. He went back, cav off the
heads of the children, and threw them tovvards the gate like a polo-ball.
The door opened, and Kesar and a'Bruguma, thoagh she had faiated,
rode through it. 'a Brugums said that she would not bear any more
children to Kegar. Now she was punished in the following way : From
the land of the dwarfs to gLing she was tied to the tail of the borse
And dragged aloog. Then she had to be everybody's servant for three
years, for three years lacerne W88 down on her head and ploughed with
Dzor ; for three years she had to serve in the castle with leather round
her knees; for three years slie had to tend stone-partridges ; for three
Fears she had to milk the Senting-bird. In this way fifteen years
liad elapsed. Then one year was required to repair the gLing castle.
Now 'a Bruguma was made a lady again. The wedding lasted three
days and three nights, and they lived in perfect happiness.
1 Is this perhaps a similar expresion to tho Gorman " Dic Sonne ziocht
Wagner "

VOCABULART.
1.
ycigpotse, alone, solitary.
Farg'anin solba bsadcas, ' kill the coal,' make charcoal.
2595 , phang shing, spindle-stick.
N 'EI 'I ma lcang, mother-willow , large kind of .willow.
khumbu, originally khombu, shell [o. & wall-nat]. As
similation to second syllable.
thsere, all the time; mthaan there, all through the night.
curum , imitates the sound of chewing.
QARTINI brgyalcas, said of the voice of foxos ; ' howl.'
vya, slate or flat stones.
shog sgra, whistling sound ; the Sheh-version has shugs
&gra.
151 rkang ra, = rkang sgra, a noise such as is caused by the
feet, when walking or jumping. Lad. Grammar, Laws of Sound, No. 3.
a 'o, exclamation.
i ngan, not bad.
51 zod, about so much, related to thsod ; compare thsam and cam .
3891ā denna zod, just as much.
mjug rdum , = mjug lzum , busby-tailed.

815
cung kha, = skyung kha, raven.
SPL 
21'34 sballu, originally 'frog'; is here understood to mean
" dwarf.'
sems tku bcocas, steal the soul,' il., make
other people to like me.
gyama lan, rare occasion.
ཁྲོལ་འཇོམ་མོ། &lsrot "adsomama ༠
name of a female dwarf.
Farara khrollemo,
sibiting, explained as meaning ' artery."
551 ohoho, exclamation.
639, thrasug, = khrabo, many-coloured.
rug 'abrisma, thunder-written,' namo of
Chinese silk with the pattern of clouds and dragons.
ar khyen, Yarkand.
grong grong, high-hoaded (of horses).
halman, good (of dried apricots).
gar harga bal kholma, wool-spioner, name of the maid-servant of
Hor.
menze, cleau, beautiful.
goraj 
warni ollo, clean, good.
NA # 55** 1 skyab mdurma, instead of skynbs blur ; in this forma
the name would mean 'help in front of [yon}.'
Cor: dung dung, shell-coloured ; also in Talo No. III the
dwarfs are called white.

810
braq thºạo đang đứng ( probably dung rưng),
name of the door of two rocks which continually open and shut again.
rdoba ta phar nam phar, stones which con
tinually dy about between earth and #ky; parallel to the preceding.
MT3 P a kara khamba, "brown fougar,' nume of a wild yak
in the service of the king of Hor.
J199988 nag [nage ] bstancas, to behave basely.
1991 midpt.-- pa, devour.
STS ', steở chung, little axe.
atubcas, mince (meat).
risiblog, side of the ribs.
bolmo, soft.
951 thud, united (the nine bridges ).
si gandre, a coat of many layers of cloth , sown one on
another,
O sikyim , silk (perbaps from Sikkim ).
khragpa, the wide sleeves.
Itsangcas, beg.
skyangcas, probably more correct than rgyangcas in
previous tale ; to fill.'
rmug blama, probably smug blama, the brown lama ;
the lama of Hor.

317
5751 rgyun, ribbands to fasten shoes.
WA TEU lam gag, said to mean "cross-way.'
གོམ་ཅས། gonica8, itep over.
QANETI zhabs rdon, = rhabs vdo, sockle. Lad. Grammar, Laws of
Sound, No. 5.
1 snyan dar, melodious silk ; name of the prayer-flags on
the top of a mchod rten ,
garu 'abul ya, respectful for wages.
CIRI Icam , ' wife,' name of the smith's daughter ; another name of
the same girl is choron , in the Sheh -version her names aro Bhag 'adzommo
and chorol.
coma 'abum , is also spelled byema 'abum ; people are
doubtful about this word. Some think it is a spoon, others a head .
ornament.
aprūpalkys, palanquin .
NI Himis, name of the smith of Hor, the propunciation
seems to vary, sometimes it ia Homis.
ri51 thang myed, Kesar's name as a smith ; is explained as
the boy foand on the plain '; should it not bo # corruption of thar
rayod ? Later op Kesar receives the same Songgo dom Idan.
Thab thuas, garden dedicated to tho goda (Tha ) ; the
* I cannot explain.
SC 'st bungbu, for bopgbu, assimilation to the second syllable.
dal thod , turban.

318
papr, cloth-shoes.
Q955 'abangba, become wet ; intransitive of slangba, make wet.
ར་གོ ། *a༡༠, lioof.
lumcas, be diligent, ready for work.
QUETINT 
excellence.
W5! yad, 
RENUNT Idzongscas, examine.
The
12010, nobleman.
651 mgo icad, box on the head
rmeba, here explained as meaning the crest on the head,
which is also an attribute of Buddha.
khrubcas, Lower Ladakbi for thubcas, be able.
yinām , recompense, Urdu.
STUHL thsagsma= thsagma, sieve.
rang khung, said to mean 'bow.'
Tai minba, = menba, berides.
athamscas, is here used for ' wrestle.'
shubste, softly (of speech).
sholcas, disperse, go away.
Qaam 'abruz' ka, tho 'pillar which is the beart-arters' of thio

319
king of Hor. The Khalatse version as 'abrilssi kr; the s is probably
dus to the other formation of the genitive, seo Lad. Grammar ,
6 .
www yal, = yar, a small piece of butter,
garcha choronmo (or choronemo], a name of the
smith 's daaghter; choron , = chos sgron , Lad. Grammar, Laws of Sound,
No. 3,
dpung ylad, helper.
har ji, provisions. (Urdu.)
INTENT dmag risas, armour.
a ko ljag res, turn to go to fight.
TENTO gongma buthaa, the boy from the upper (place);
name of an agn.
Itaba miggi rab, name of the agu who is famous
for his sharp eyes.
abitse, mouse.
ya seb, hole between looge stones.
S TRATTON ra nag khra glorings, the horse - black and
piebald, having long (lasting) lunga.'
ma yyu mna rtual (in the Preface he was spelled
'athal); name of the aga who ia famous for his sharp ears.
A gani, another Apelling for dyoni; the agu may havo ro
ceived his name on accoint of his armour (gani)

320
chil doon, officer at the Ladakhi court, who has to
provide flour.
6151 me ra, = me sgra , roaring of fire.
charla, explained as meaning till the middle of a house.
N EI slogpa, sheep-skin worn by women .
bya khuyug, = khuyu, the 'hornless bird,' name of the
ann-bird ; perhaps because he is never of the shape of a horn, in opposi
tion to the moon.
thar ngad btangcas, do the work of a smith.
55'9565V 
201 pen , probably dpen, sign ; Lad. Grammar, Laws of Sound,
No. 5.
brought from China.
rgya long, a mirror 
2015
1 mnyag, a single hair.
8.
Piurcha, peg.
པུར་ཆ། 
mal tsa, = mal sa, bed .
woro 
pou gro, bunch, bundle.
THE #umen, is also a name of a lapis lazuli.
ydubs, = ydub, ring
ala, plaster.
EV1 
mali bay phe, par.

821
muza, Yarkandi boots ; related to Urdu mosa.
FON I rnumscar, accept.
gyung skor, wall round the cartle.
wagan2 yumadulila, together.
r phog, the first blow in s polo-game.
hkradcas, to drag along.
megemn, knee.
S i sentig, a yellow bird ; (bere the name of the san-bird ?).
un ystum mthsoge, like the three brothers '
(nons of dBangpo rgyab zhin ?). This is the Lower Ladakhi rendering
of parin sum thoogs, perfect.

322

323
A LOWER LADAKHI VERSION OF THE
KESAR SAGA.
LIST OF PERSONAL AND LOCAL NAMES, AND OTHER
PROPER NOUNS OCCURRING IN THE KESAR SAGA
The following contains a list of all the proper nouns found in those
Chapters of the Kesar Saga and kindred literature, which have been
published by me till 1912. Besides the ' Lower Ladakhi Version of the
Kosar Saga ', the following works must be mentioned :
1. — 'The Paladins of the Kesar Saga,' a collection of Sagas from
Lowor Ladakh, J. P. A .S.B ., New Series, Vol. II, 1906, pp. 467 ff,
Vol. III, pp. 67 ff, Vol. III, 1 7 , pp. 261 ff. This collection
consists of the following five tales.
(1) The Tale of Kesar's beloved Mon.
(2) The Tale of Kya-ba- god-po.
(3) The Tale of Shel-li-bu -zhung.
(4) The Tale of Gong-ma-br -thaa 's boy and Gyal-sa-dkar-po.
(5) The Tale of gSer-ni-bu-zhung.
II. — Der Frühlings- und Wintermythus der Kosarsage, Mémoires de la
Société Finno-ougrienne No. XV, Helsingfors, 1902. An English
translation of the spring-myth (Frühlingsmythus) is found in the
Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXXI, 1902. It consists of the following
nine tales :
(1) of the Agus.
(2) of dBang-po-rgyab-bzhin's three Bona.
(3) of Don -grub'. fitting out for the land of Gliny.
(4) of Don-grub's birth on earth.
(5) of Khro-mo who gought to harm Kesar,
(6) of the maiden 'aBru -gui-ma.
(7) of 'aBru-gu-ma who became Kesar's bride.
(8) of Kesar who teases 'aBru -gu -mu,
(9) of the wedding.
The winter-myth consists of the following tales :
(1) Kesar's departure for the north .
(2) Kosar's arrival before the devil's castle in the north,
(3) Kesar's victory over the devil of the north,
(4) Kesar's return to Gling.
(5) Kesar's journey to Hor.

324
(6) Kemer's doings with the smith of Hor,
(7) Kesar's preparations for the combat with the King of Hor.
(8) Kesar's victory over the King of Hor.
(9) Kegar's return to Gling.
III.-- The Ladakhi Pre-buddhist Marriage Ritual, Text and Translation
published in the Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, pp. 131ff. The
first nine songs only of this hymnal have been published ; they
trent principally of the 'troo of the world .'
IV. - The Gling-glue of Khalatse ig a hymnal of nine songs, sung at the
occasion of the spring-- or Kesar- festival at Khalatse. It is found
in Ladakhi Songs, Songs No. XXI-XXIX . Indian Antiquary,
Vol. XXXI, 1902.
The Gling-glu of Phyi-dhang is a similar hymnal from the village of
Phyi-dbang. It was published under the title ' A Ladakhi Bonpa
Hymnal' in the Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, pp. 359 ff.
V . — The woven bagas contained in the Lower Ladakhi Version of the
Kesar Saga contained in the present volume, are as follows :
(1) Prologue to the Konarsaga. pp. 1-29.
(2) The Story of Keear's birth , pp. 30 –83.
(3) The Story of 'aBru-gu -ma's marriage to Kesar, pp. 84-138.
(4) Keser's Journey to China, pp. 139-163.
(5) Kesar's Viotory over the giant of the north, Pp. 164–199.
(6) Capture of 'sBru-gu -ma by the King of For, pp. 200-256.
(7) Defeat of the King of Hor, pp. 266-321.
In the following list are included all the proper nouns occurring in :
1. 'A Lower Ladakhi Version of the Korer-Saga,' (8).
2. "The Palading of the Kosar-Saga,' (P ).
3. "Der Frühlings- und Winterthythug der Kommage, (La, Lb).
4. The Gling-glu of Khalatge, and the Ging-glu of Phyi-dbang, (GI. Kh.;
. Gl. Ph.).
6. The Ladakhi Pre-buddhist marriage-ritual, (M .R .).
Nos. 2 –5 are all reprinted as Appendices. Large numerale refer to
the parts of each work, and if followed by a small numoral connected
by a hyphen , the latter indicates the subsection as the part.
TI'S |Ka-bu-lu , (unintelligible ), a goat killed and sacrificed by Kesar,
before leaving for China. S. 4.1.
18

325
2-tog-yang-'adzin, (unintelligible), commander of the
smiths of Gling, 8 . 6.7. He assists Kesar on the road to Hor, $. 7.1.
Mentioned in P . 3. The second half of the name means in Ladakhi
Seirer of joy.'
mañ | Ka-la-kol, (unintelligible) first country of the world, s. 1.
mpango 5 | Ka-li-mān-ni-men-log-gi-jo, ‘Lord of the Kali
mān-flower,' a name of Kesar, Gl. Kh. 8.
TO 559 1 (or corrupt :.... 635 ) Kun-byung-thar-rnyed , 'he
who finds delivery for all creatures.' Keser's name as smith in
Hor. Lb. Compare mbar-phrug-thang-myed .
ToVĚTÀ 778 FRIEN Kun-la-mozes pai-Kun-mdzes-sol-ma,
"Târâ, more beautiful than all,' nickname of Maiden Go-chod, P. 3.
Ke-sar, King of Cling, son of Gog-bzang-tha-mo, S. 2 ff. Prin
cipal figure of the Kesarsaga. He is generally called Cling-rgyal
lham -Ke-8ar. He makes men of bones in S. 1.3. He does not allow
the ogres to eat human flesh or borse flesh. He makes rain in 8. 7.2.
He takes the shape of a crow in P. 3 and calls dPal-moi-n-stag to
assist rGyal-sa-dkar-po. There he is called A-ba Kesar, 'father
Kosar." See also P. 4-5 and Gl. Kb. 1. Compare Gling-rgyal-tha, etc.
T I NT Ker-zong-onyan-po or Pha-lha-skyer-rdzong-sayan-po
Kesar's father-god (pha-lha), S. 2. See under Pha-tha, etc.
Daya Kyal-kyil, a well. P. 4. (akhyil means 'whirl.")
DV5 | Kye-sar, see Ke-sar. This spelling is found in S. 3.1. It is
explained as skye-gear, the 'reborn one.' The name is said to refer
to Kesar's rebirth on earth after his death in heaven. The spelling
Kye-sar is in correspondence with the popular pronunciation of this
name in Lahoul, Zangs-dkar, and other tracts.

326
TE 'N Kra-phus-se, (unintelligible) a rat born to Gog-bzang-lha-ino
in the forest, La. N .
Klu-rgyal- joga-po, (ljogs-po = lcog-po), the 'lower Nāga.
623
king.' (Compare ljam = icam , spouse.) S. 2. He is connected
with the colours black or blue, S. 5.2. He has a black sheep on his
shoulder wluich is explained as a lotus-flower, P. 3-4. Offorings to
bin M .R . 1.
lu-skyin, "Nāga ibex,' he usks Kesar to protect all the ibexes.
S. 3-5.
*555051 Klu-rta-ongon-chung, the 'little blue Năga-horse ' name of
the horso of King Cog-po, La. 7.
Tag Tag | Klu -mo-dar-gyi-go-chod-ma, the 'clever Nági, one
of the ice,' she lives in a lake, she is the only being who is able to
read Kesar'a letter. S. 6.7.
lu -mo-dar-gyi-mthong.mdzes-ma, the 'Nāgi
of the ice, beautiful to look at,' P. 1.
KÉTH Klu-mo-dar-gyi-yang-mdzes-ma, the 'Nāgi of
779 
the ice, beautiful in her play,' P. 1.
Klu-yul, 'the land of the Nāgas,' the lowest of the three empires
of the world. It has 18 towns. P. 1. The many riches, children ,
and cattle of the Klu, Lb. 5, 16, 17. It is covered by the roots of
the tree of the world.
Kar-thig-ma, 'the white-spotted one' (?), the eldest
daughter of the forefather mGar-ba at Gling-castle. S. 1. She is
called Gog-bzang-tha-mo's younger sister, in S. 1. A-ne-bkur-dman
mo takes her shape in S . 2 and La. 4 . Mentioned in P. 4.
STRE 55 aray'dKar-poi-dngul-ri, the white silver-bill' It is
formed out of the ogre's heart (creation-story). $. I.

327
577 NEW , dBar-moi-stong-chong, the “white hold a thousand,"
the chief of all bags, probably a metaphor for the cloud. It is
brought from the castle Pa-chi-dpal-Idong, S. 1. It is called skye
mo-dKar-moi-stong-shong in S. 2. There it is the mother of Phad.
Ichra-bo. (skye-mo, a mistake for egye-mo.)
ATR '2015Ka-blon-idan-pa, 'the minister, the owner ’ the fifteenth
of the eighteen agus; he has a man's head, S. 1. He acts as the
traitor among the Agus in P. 1. He seizes 'a Bru-gu-ma and the
Gling castle, when Kesar is in Klu-yul.
Kā-blon-ldan-pa, 'the minister, the owner,' or 'minister
IDan-pa,' son of bDud-lha-cin , Kesar's enemy, S. 2.9.
ATT 980 6 Kur-dman-rgyal-mo, the 'honourable female, the
queen ,' name of dBang-po-brgya-byin's wife. She takes the shape
of dKar-thig-mo. Called Kur-dman-mo in La . 4 , or A -ne-bkur-dman
mo in Lb. l. GI. Kh. 2.5.
AMÉRI OKur-'adzom , 'collected honour,' name of the maid -servant
of the smith of Hor. Lb. 6 .
TÀN | Kra-shis,'happiness,' name of the forefather, S. 1. Compare
mGar-ba-bKra-shis.
auĀNbKra -shis, 'happiness,' name of the emith of Gling, P. 4.
Perhaps identical with the preceding.
Kang-rkang-rings, long leg'; the thirteenth of the
eighteen agus; he has a foot instead of a head . $. 1. He is one
of the seven agus according to P. 2. He carries the water from
the sea to the castle of Gro-yul, P. 2. A Be-da-rKangs rings is
mentioned in S. 6.7.
716 "ARAK Kyang-khra-me-long, the ikiang, the falcon, the mirror,'
name of the horse of rGyal-sa -dkar-po. P. 4 . A flame is seen
burning on its head. It is opened and closed with a key.

328
1655 * Kyang.rgod-dbyer-pa, compare "Kyang-byung-dbyer
pa. The meaning of dbyer -pa is uncertain. The first part of the
name means 'wild Kiang,' or 'born from a Kiang. 8 . 1 ff.
Kosar's horse. It is sent back from the north, whilst Kabar goes
to Gling. Together with its arrival spring sets in. S. 6-7. The
hair of this horse is plucked and placed on the hoad by the people ,
as a sign of blessing, P . 3.4. It is killed with a sling by mDi.
dpon -phru -gu, when he obtains Kyang-khra-me-long, as his horse.
See also La, Lb.
K 9575 | “Kyang-byung-kha-dkar, 'Offspring of the Kiang,
white-mouth,' the horse born to Cog-bzang-tha-mo, LA. N .
6355372 7Kyang-byung-dbyer-pa, Kesar's horse, identical with
Kyang-rgod-dbyer-pa, born to rdod-ma-thsa-langs, S. 2-8, Ls. 3.
är $Kad-anyan-gling-bu, the 'flute of sweet sound,' a
place (probably) made of the ogre's nose, (account of the croation )
S. 1.
| Kya-dang-zar-bu-dol-thog-rol-ma, " Tārā of
the soup-spoon , ladle, and stone-pot ’; nickname of maiden Go
chod , P. 3.
N 5 1 Kya-ba-dkar-po, 'white ladle,' son of Kya-ba-road .
po, P. 2.
Kya-ba -rgod-po, wild ladle, the fifth of the eighteen agus .
Ho has a ladle instead of a bead . S. 1. The story of his son see P . 2.
He is eaten by & Yak and delivered from the Yak's stomach by his
HON. P. 2.
Kyin -chen-ba-rgan, “the big ibex, the old cow,' born to
Gog-brang-tha mo. S. 2.7.
CRI Kye-ser-rlunge-ro, 'tho wind, the producer of cool.
noas.' Ho croated the upper and lower valloys. M .R . 3.

329
Kha-rgan-[d )-ga-ni, Kha-rgan means old mouth,'
the third of the 18 Agus. He has a white board. S. 1. He goes
to Jang-yul, P. 4 ; to the horse-market in Hor. Lb. 6.
AFA Kha-cul, Kashmir. It is famous for its rico. S. 7-1. P. 3,
reads Kha-chul.
ATT * * Ah Kha-ra-gu-ram -sbrang-rtsi-rol-ma, " Tāră of
sugar, syrup, and honey,' nickname of Go-chod. P. 3.
Kha-la-me-bar, Fire burning in his mouth,' name of the
principal of all stallions (“ Ta-pho) S. 1. This horse wag robbed by
the King of Hor. $. 6-4. It is able to fly through the air. Kesar
brings it back to Gling after a riding contest in Hor. P . 3.
ACQ9 || Khung-'abrug, the 'thunder-dragon.' Killed by Kesar in
his fifth year. Lb.
Khya-ba-lag-ringa, see Khyab-pa-lag-rings S. 6-1. P. 4.
52Q RCVT Khyab-pa-lag-ringa, 'coverer, long-hand,' a name of
the devil in S. 5 .1, 3. Probably the husband of Dre-mo-bam -za
'abum -skyid . Killed by Kesar, He roars in his grave. Kesar
mutters certain mystic formulas over him , to keep him in his grave.
He was killed by Kesar in Kesar's sixteenth year, 800 GI. Kh. 3.
1 Khyi-gu-khra-chung, the little piebald dog.' He will be
Khyi-mo-Hom -dkar-mo's comfort, when Rhyi-pho-geer-lings goes to
the north. S . 5 .1.
251 Khyi-ljag, 'dog-sling,' name of 'a Bru-gu-ma's sling. P. 1.
67A RENT Khyi-pho-gser-lings, the 'dog golden-hunt,' born to
Khy -mo-dkar-mo, S. 2-8. He goes to the north. . 5 .

330
ATST Khyi-mo-dkar-mo, the white bitch,' the mother of all
dogs, brought from Pa.chi-dpal-Idong-castle. Compare Khyi-mo
Hom -dkar in $. 5 .1. She is the mother of Khyi-pho-geer-linge,
S. 2.8. According to La. N ., Khyi-mo-dkar-mo is the mother of
Drum -bu-brang-dkar.
57 | Khyi-mo-ltom -dkar, the 'bitch with a white belly,'
compare Khya-mo-dkar-mo, with whom she may be identical. She
wails on account of Khyi-pho-gser-ling's departure to the north.
S. 5-1. She takes his place whilst he is away, S. 6.2.
BHAGV | Khyu-mo-thsa-langs, 'mother of many, envy raising'
horse of Seng-chen-rgyal-lham Lb. 6.
G TA555Up | Khyem -bu-pang-ka-tog-t6e-rol-ma, 'Tárā of
the shovel and pick-axe,' nickname of Go-chod. P. 3.
Khra-akya-dkar-po, the 'white falcon.' Her nest is on
the sixth bough of the tree of the world. She has an iron egg
M .R . 8. Kesar takes her shape GI. Kh. 6. GI. Ph. 6.
S AW61.95 Khra-mig- Yang-shan, 'piebald eye full of joy,' a lady.
friend of dPal-moi-a-slag, in dPal-yul, P. 4. Yang shan is Yangs-car .
SQ 5 :951 Khrai-mgo-Khrui-thung, "falcon-head, three years
old '; the fourth of the eighteen agns. He has a falcon's head,
s. 1. In S. 2 he is calied Khrai-mgo-Khru-thung. In $. 3.2, where
the spelling Khrai-thung is again found, we read that he was made
the head of the land of Gling and was supposed to receive 'aBru.
gu-ma as his bride. In $. 4-1, Kesar sends him to China in his
place. When Kesar goes to China, the agu makes himself King of
Gling during the former's absence. Kesar kills him on his return
from China, S. 4-4. During Kesar's journey to Byang he resides at
IDem -Idem -mi-Idem -mkhar. He makes a weak attempt to deliver
'aBru -gu-ma from the King of Hor, but is frightened by the voioes
of the Turks, s. 6.3. He killed 'aBu-dmar-lam -bstan by roughly
pulling the arrow out of his wound. Kesar punishes him for this

331
by placing a heavy load on his back on the way to Hor, S. 6.7. He
is frightened by two Nāgis. Pl. He is one of the group of seven
agus according to P . 2. In P . 4 we read that 'a Bu-dmar-lam -betan
forgives him his faults.
Khri-rgya -mthso-chen -mo, the great ocean of the
throne'; rGyal-sa-dkar-po goes thore . P. 3.4.
Khro-mo, the name seems to mean ‘anger.' One of gser-ri-bu .
zhung's followers in P . 5 . He is called Agu -Khro.mo in L . 1. His
character is bad. He tries to kill the child Ke-bar. But he is
thrown against a rock , and one side of his body is burnt. La. 5 .
According to LA. 8, he kills the devil-bird .
para Khrom -chen-mo, the 'great market. The place where
Kesar's wedding is celebratod. S . 3.7.
Q6915799 l 'aKhrul-rta -skang-gsum , the three-legged magical
horse.' It belongs to the heroes of Hor. $. 6-2, S. 7.7.
ག
Janga-slod-mthon -po, the 'high glacier,' the home
of Seng-ge-gYu-ral-can, S. 5.1.
ALEVI K ŽT1 Gangs-ti-dkar-po, .tho 'white glacier, Kailāsa,
Lb. 1.
Ama gari Qur-dkar-rgyal-po, 'King of the white tent,' the
real name of King Hor-pa-hal-de S. 6 -2. His altar (lha -tho) is of a
brown or violet colour. It is destroyed by Kesar. $. 7-8 . When
he is killed by Kesar, the latter is almost drowned in his fat,
S. 7-8. He is called Gur-dkar-Ide-hor in Lb. 6. He is also men
tioned in Lb. 3 and P. 4.
A m a Gur-gum -thsas, 'garden of calendula flowers. The
garden of Kesar's horse. Lb . 1.

332
AK O Gur-rmug-bla -ma, 'priest of the brown tont,' the priest
of the King of Hor. 8. 7-8.
ETT Go-chod, the 'clover one,' sorvant-girl of Shel-Idang-lha-mo.
She was given to nine peasante in turn as a bride; but could not
agree with any of them . P . 3.
Go-shen-dang-yug-dar-dkar-rol-ma,
" Tärk of velvet and white silk .' Nickname of Go-chod. P. 3.
FERAT I Gog-za-tha-mo, compare Gog-bzang-lha-mo, Kesar's mother
on earth . La. 4.
Gog-bzang-lha-mo, (unintelligible), earthly mother o
King Kesar. S. 2. She lived in the cold valley (Grang-ngi-lung-pa).
Pa-sang-ldan-rva-akyes was her husband, but not Kesar's father,
According to P . 4 gbe was the third daughter of smith Kra-shis.
1589 | Gong-ma-bu-thoa, the upper boy,' belongs to the group
of seven agus. He is sent out to catch Kesar, who appears as a
spy from Hor. S. 7-6. He takes the shape of a falcon and of a
weasel. In S. 7-7, he is oalled Gong-ma-no-no. His horse is called
Dung-gi-dar-dkar. He is a great archer, see S. 7.7. He goes to
IJang-yul, see P . 4.
5 315411 Grang-ngi-lung-pa, 'cold valley,' near Ka-la -kol S. 1.
Place of agu Pa-sang-dan-rua-skyes s. 2 . Spelt Drang-gilung-pa
in P. 1.
Gri-gu-sor-gaum , 'Knife of a length of three fingers,'
Kesar's knife ; perhaps identical with Dug-pa-can-gri-gru mentioned
in P. 1. See Lb. 8.
ASN Gru-gu-gYu, a country. The nyo-pas of the King of that
country go to ( a )Gro-yu , P, 3.

333
Gre-zha-opun-bdun, 'the seven Gre-zha,' killed by Kosar
'@ ' 98551 
identical with Dre
in his second year, Lb. 8. They are probably 
zha-Kham -ba, Gl. Kh. 4.
'96 | Gro-ma-thang, the 'plain of Groma roots.' . 1.2. La. 6.
* * art | Gro-chen -royal-po, the 'great King of Gro-yul.' P. 2.
INST I Gro-mo-80-dkar, ‘lady of Oro [land] with white teeth,'
daughter of the King of Gro-yul. Her name is also spelt Gro -mo
80-gar, P. 2 .
* Gro-yul; 'land of wheat,' or 'land of creatures,' a mythological
country. The name is also erroneously spelt 'agro-yul, P. 2. This -
country is callod bDud-yul, 'devil's realm ' in P. 3.4.
ar ANS I Clang.mo-mkhal-dkar, 'eagle white kidney,' name
of the bird whose nest is found on the fourth bought of the tree of
the world. She has a silver egg. M .R. 8.
as Gling, the earth ; or gling-dkar, the white varth.' 8. 1. Gling.
bzhi, the four continents, mentioned in $. 2.9. Gling-bzhi-gru.
brgyad, the four continents with oiglit corners. S. 5.1. See also
La. 1.
ing-mkhar-rtae-dgu, 'castle of Gling with nine pin
nacles,' $. 1.2. It contains the stores of old meat and old butter.
S. 6.3. It is destroyed by King Gur-dkar of Hor. On its top,
'aBu -dmar-lam -bstan's mchod-rlen is built. P. 4. See also Lb. 3.
Gling-gi-mgo-ri, “chief-mountain of Gling,' name given
5 
to Kesar, after his victory over Bya-nyi-ma-khyung-rung, S. 3.- 7.
V . 1.
* 1 Cling-rgyal-Iham-be-sar, 'Kesar, the divine King
â 'Hygg 
of Gling. The principal figure of the Saga. His birth, his mar.
riage to 'aBru -gu-ma, his victory over the giant of the north ; his

334
victory over the King Gur-dkar of Hor ; his journey to China. In
S. 5-2, he is connected with the colour greon (Ijang-thu). His
ugly shape is connected with hail and storm ; his beautiful shape is
connected with sunshine.
59197 A1 dqa-ni-gong-ba, (or: Ga-ni-gong-ba ) perhaps: * the
highest collar,' name of the eleventh of the 18 agus. He has a
collar instead of a head . $. 1. 'aBru -gu -ma asks him to cast lots ;
he is Kesar's rival as a suitor for 'a Bru -gu-ma. S. 3-4. He is called
dGü-ni in LA. 1. According to La. 6 he sits on a golden throne.
In L . 8 we find him connected with gold and copper. In Lb. 3 he
is called dGa-ni-mgon -po. Agu -Ga-ni is one of the seven agus of
the saga. S . 7.7.
575395' 1 dGung-phrug-khra -skya, ' child of the midday, light.
coloured falcon '; name of an agu , mentioned in Lb. 6 .
ga1355775 dCung-stod -mthon-po, 'the high zenith , compare
gNam -stod-mthon-po, GI: Kh. 6.
193 5 b mdar-cha -cho-ron (= chos-sgron ), 'Portion of the smith ,
light of virtue,' name of the smith 's daughter in Hor. S. 7-8.
. Compare Chos-ma-agran .
51973996551 mGar-phrug-thang-enyed , 'child of the fmith, found
on the plain. Kesar's name when he was an apprentice to the
smith of Hor. $ . 7.7. Compare Kum -byung-that-rnyed.
མག mGar- phrug-seng-ge-don- Idan, 'child of the
smith , possessing the qualities of a lion.' Name given to Kesar by
the King of Hor, when he delivered him from tbe box -string. $ . 7.5.
HAT' 'qna mGar-ba-bkra -shis, 'smith-happiness,' or A -pho
bkra-this, ' forefather happiness.' Name of the forefather who
resided at the Gling-castle. S. l.
mGar-mo-lcam , the female smith, the wife,' name of
the water-carrier or wife of smith He-mis. Kosar calls her his
sister, S. 7-3.

335
J975 Nmdar-ra (cmgar-ba)-hi-mis, ‘smith Hi-mis,' smith of
the King of Hor $ . 7. Kesar pretends to be his son. He assists
Kenar in making the iron rope, by which Kesar climbs up to the
top of the Hor castle.
5945 '5 mGo-bo-ldad ( = glad)-dkar, 'white head,' name of a
bird whose nest is found on the third bough of the tree of the world ,
'agro-yul, a mistake for Gro-yul. She has a pearl-white egg. M .R . 8.
5 5 5921a God-poi-dpal-le, soe dPal-le-rgod-po, S. 3.3.
DACV rGod-ma-thea-langs, the mare ' Rising of envy.' The
first of horses. $. 1. She is the mother of Kyang-rgod -dbyer-pa.
S. 2-7, S. 5-1. La N . Shel-li-bu-zhung rides on her. P. 3. She is
called Thea-Idang in La. N .
HTRA Gya-gar-yul (= rGyal-dkar), 'the white expanse,' India .
'a Bru-gu -ma says that she has acon it. Some people assert that she
came from India. Gl. Ph . 8. M .R . 5.
AGATS Gya-stag-khra -bo, 'the many-coloured rope,' probably
the rain-bow , the chief of ropes. S. 1. It was brought from the
castle Pa-chi-dpal-idong. It is the mother of T'hag-b -khru-gang.
5571 Gya-dar-rise, 'summit of extensive ico,' name of a village.
P. 4.
1 Gya-nag, the 'black expanse,' China. S. 4. It is covered
with leprosy S. 4-3. The leprosy disappears on Kesar's arrival.
S . 4.4. It is famous for its silk -cloth sbowing patterns of dragons.
$. 7.1, P . 3. The ngo-pa from Gya-nag go to Gro-yul. P . 3.
U Gya -nag-khri-skor-gsum , the three provinces of
China . 8.4-2.
55: 1 Gya-nag-rgyal.po, 'King of China.' Kesar sends illness
to him . He sends a bird to Kesar as a messenger , after that he

336
sende a man formed of earth and his own blood a8 a messenger,
Kesar comes and heals him from leprosy. $. 4. The son of the
King of China carries off Shel-Idang-lha-mo of Gro-yul. P. 3. .
CASTI Gya-bong-kha-dkar, the chief donkey with a white
mouth . He goes to the north. S. 5-1. Compare Nag-po-kha
dkar.
557131 Gyab-sten-pho-long, the 'back-leaning rock,' a rock
made out of the ogre's kidnøys. 8. 1.
AA!" 1rGyal-lang, the 'royal willow,' the willow of the world. Its
roots are in g Yog-klu, and its highest branches in Tang-tha. It
has six boughe. S. 3.7. MR.
P r 5 1 royal-Icang-lcang-gi-lcang-stod, the upper part
of the royal willow ' (willow of the world). Name of a place in
Gling 8. 3.7. The gods walk about thero. GI. Kh. 1.
rgian Gyal-bw -rgyal-sa, 'Prince grandson (!)'a name of Shel.
Hi-bri-zhung or of Gyal-sa-dkar-po P. 3. He fights against the
heroes of Gro-yol, but runs away before Ri-bo-blon-chen. He is
saved by dPal-moi-a-stag He is also called Gyal-bu-shel-dkar.
P . 4. (rgyal-sa = rgyal thea, royal grandson).
159815 | Gyal-thoa-shel-dkar, Kesar's son, killed by Gur-dkar
of Hor, Lb. 4.
Fraudot Gyat-lam -chen-mo,“great King,' name given to Kesar
by the wild sheep. P. 3, Gl. Kh. I. Compare Gling rgyal lham ,
Kosar.
TONT T Gyal-sa-dkar-po, the white prince,' name of Kosar's
son who fights against Wang-yul, P . 4 .
tri-ma-rong, gorge made of the ogre's intestines (Creatiop
of the world). S. 1.

337
e-mo-dkar-moi-s Tong.shong, 'white bag holda
a thousand,' the cloud . S . 1.9. Compare dKar-moi-slong-shong.
ད །
dNgul-gyi-ri, "silver-hill.' It is situated on the road to
Dri-mo-dgu-chod . S. 3.4.
go-rog-pon-pon , 'blue-black , with a curled mane,
name of dPal-le's horse, S. 2 ; received from mother Kyabs-bdun ,
It takos the place of rKyang-rgod-dbyer-pa, when Koser goes to the
north . S. 6. In P. 4 it is the name of agu Ga-ni-gong-ba 's horse.
Mentioned in Lb. 6.
Ngờm-po -gYa-ri, the “blue turquoise hill, mentioned
in S . 2. P. 4 .
ཅ །
'331 Cu-ru-lu -gu, (lu-gu perhaps = Klu -dgu, ‘nine någas ') name
of Khyab-pa -lag-rings, the devil. S . 5 .]. Lb. 1-3. Name of a
'aBrong or wild yak in P . 4. Killed by Kosar in his eighth year.
Lb. 8.
ET
DODATTÁCW Chu-mig-thsang.ya, a well, made of the ogre's eyes
(Creation of the world ). S. 1-2.
Chu-sram -ka-ma, the 'whitebreasted otter'; it is also
ཆུ་སྲམ་ཀ་ནི 
called Chu-aram -brang-dkar, Gl. Kh. 6.
51 Cho-ron, see Chos-sgron-ma. Lb. 7.

338
Chos-agron-ma, 'lamp of religion (dharma)' name of the
daughter of the smith of Hor. She is also called mGar-cha-cho-ron .
Lb . 7 .
hos-agrol, 'delivery by religion (dharma),' naine of the
smith's wife, La. N . Cho-rol in La. 6 is 'a Bru-gu-ma's mother.
Cho-rol is the same as Chos-ogrol.
ཇ །
PATAHT Jo-jo- abru-gu-ma, (abru-gu means a little grain ').
Jo-jo means 'lady.' Kesar's wife. At first she was to be given to
agu Khrai-thung. $. 3.2. She is turned out, and sent into a black
tent, whon Kesar goog to China. Her hill is of blue colour. S. 5.2.
According to S . 6.2 'a Bru-gu-ma's upper half was of gold , her lower
half of turquoise; but according to S . 5 .2, her hair was very black ,
and her teetb and nails of the whitest. She fights against King Gur
dlear, but is frightened by the loud roar of his attendants. Then
she becomes his wife. S. 6-3. As she is guilty of having caused
the death of 'a Bu-dmar-lam -betan , she is punished by Lucerne being
growo on her head for three years. $. 6.4. In P. 4 we read that she
insertod medicine in the borse's ear. In GI. Kh. We read that
thunder is caused by her walking in heaven. Compare 'aBru-gu
ma and a Brug mo. She is of milk -white colour. GI. Ph. 4 .
Jang-yul, the 'green country. It is situated beyond the
frontier of sun and moon. P . 4 . Kesar's son makes war against it;
he marries the princess of this country.
Tang-8a-gYui-cho-ron -ma, the 'turquoise light
of religion (dharma), daughter (1) of Wang,' name of the daughter
of the King of Wang-yul. She is gained by Kesar's son r( yal-sa
dkar-po. P. 4 . Abridged IJanga-cho-ron .
ga i Wange-si-dam -rgyal-po, (si-dam ?), name of the
King of IJang-yul. P. 4.

339
31
BARE 19 Nya-mo-gser-mig, the 'female fish golden-bye,' name
of the fish, born to Gog-bzang-tha -mo, S. 2.7. LA. N . Lb. 1. 'aBru .
gu-ma takes her shape. Gl. Kh. 6. It is also called Khyri-ri
nya-mo.
Nyi-ma, the sun, born to Gog-bzang-lha-mo; his home is gNam
stod -mthon-po, the high zenith. $. 2.7. In S. 6.7, the nyi-ma-spun.
bdun, the seven sun-brothers,' are mentioned. This seems to
refer to the calendar of the seven agus. In MR. 3, the sun is
called Khri-gduga-nyi-ma, the throne-umbrella ,' and also 'creator
of east and west.'
5 
T
FAS 'as Ti-bang-bang, name of a mountain in Upper Gling (Gling
stod). There the treasures obtained from Bya-nyi-ma-khyung-rung
are distributed . S. 3.7.
Sy 's Ti-für-hi, name of a high mountain in Gling, from the top of
which the three realms of the world can be seen. From hero
Kosar's letter is read to all by Nāgi Dar.gyi-go-chod -ma. S . 6.7.
Also rGyal-bu -rgyal-sa's wedding is proclaimed from the top of this
hill. P. 3.
5 & Tom -ljag, name of a jewel which has the power to keep
everybody motionless in a certain place. It is broken to pieces by
mice.
Tor-ba-nag-po, black oblatior:' (?), name of the Nāga
who lives at the feet of Shel-Idang-lha-mo in 'Gro-yul. He is mistaken
for a donkey. P. 3 .
Tan -'adzin -dmar-po, the ' rod holder of the earth '
(?), numo of a giant (?). L . 3.

340
HABAT231 ITa-ba-mig-gi-rab, ' seer good-eye,' name of one of
the seven agus who is able to see at a tremendous distance.
S . 7.6. Also called ITa-ba-mig-gi-rab-I[h]a. He accompanies
rGyal-sa -dkar po to lJang-yul. P. 4 .
STAI ITong-dkar-ma, 'white notch,' name of Kesar's arrow .
'57577 8T'a-ti-Zla-ba-d Kar.po, ‘hatchet white moon,' the
moon. $. 1.8.
y a Tag.gzig, the Tajiks, Eastern Persian tribos. Persia,
the nyo pa from this country go to 'Gro-yul to ask for the hand of
the princese. P . 3.
953 Tang-lha-yul, the upper land of the Gods,' one of the
three parts of the world ; heaven ; it is of white colour, also called
&Teng-Iha, etc. S. 1.2. La 1. The nyo-pa from Tang-lha go to
'Gro-yul, to ask for the hand of the princess. P. 3.
| 8Teng-lha-yul, see ol'ang-tha-yul.
g9gaXA (= 560) Thag-pa-rgya -stag(= thag)-khra-bo, “ rope
many-coloured,' the rainbow . S: 1-8. See rGya-slag-khra-bo.
gara575 | Thag-du-khru-gang, ‘ropo ono full yard in length,' name
of a rope, born to rQya-slag-khra-bo. S. 2.8.
57871575 Thang-dkar-mgo-dkar, the white-headed white
falcon,' he looses his strength on the Srar-pass. GI, Kh. 8.
95 5819757T1 Thang-stod.mthon.po, the 'high plain,' the home of
the wolf Shang-ku-mjug-rdum . 8. 8.1.

34 ]
5 9 mTho-ba-tla-mgo-ma, the 'hammer [of the size of] a
horse's head,' name of the hammer of the emithof Hor. Lb. 8.
ar-dkar-tse, 'summit of white ice,' the home of rGyal.
sa-dkar-po. P. 3.
GFX | Dar-sing, the ice-lion,' name of the glacier. Compare
Seng-ge-dkar-mo. M .R . 2.
I g or Dar-lha-go-chod-ma, the 'clever goddess of the ice (or
of the silk ),' name of 'aBru-gu-ma's maid-servant. P. 4. Com
pare Go-chod. LA. 6, Lb. 1.
Du -gi-mthso, poisonous lake,' a lake situated in Grang
gi-lung-pa, P. 1. The Rakas. Tal is called by that name.
ug-pa-can-gri-gu, poisonous knife,' Kesar's Knife.
He uses it to cut his way out of the stomach of the Yak which had
swallowed him . S. 7-2. The King of Hor is killed with it. $. 7-8.
59* 9* | Dug-sha-pho-long, 'rock poison-flesh.' A rock on the
road to the land of the birds.' S. 3.8. It seems to be a yak
according to P. 3. It ja subdued by Kesar in his sixth year.
Lb. 8.
5 7 591 Dung-gi-egyid-uri, 'hearth-stone of shell,' one of the
treasures of Gling-mkhar, carried off by King Gur-dkar, S. 6.4. P. 3.
551955TK | Dung-gi-dar-dkar, 'silk-white' or 'ice-white,' 'being
[made) of shell,' name of a horse given to Gong-ma-bu-thoa, $ . 7.6.
P. 3. It is to be given to Kesar's servant-boy Byang-phrug.
Occasionally the name is spelt Dung-ri-dar-dkar. According to
P. 4, it is agu dPalle's horse.
5a2a ! Dung-gi-ba-ri, (bari ?), name of teacher T'se-dgu's
monastery. P. 3.

342
Dung-abal-dkar-po, 'pearl white cell,' 'white frog of
shell,' born to Gog-za-lha-mo, in Bar-btsan. La. N .
RASTAIS Deg-bu-kha-dmar, ‘pot with a red mouth,' perhaps the
sun. The chief of utensils brought from the castle Pa-chi-dpal.
idong. S. 1, 2.8.
Deg -bu -akye-rings, 'pot with a long neck,' born to
Deg-bu-kha-dmar. 8. 2-8.
Farver 1 Dong-gsum-mi-la-ongon-mo, the, 'blue one,
tìree faces to a man,' name of the son of forefather bKra-skis.
He killed the dragon , out of whose body the world was built. S. I.
50 195 1 Din-grub-dkar-po, 'the white Siddbārtha,' name of
the third son of the King of heaven. He dies in heaven and is
reborn as King Kesar on earth to Gog-bzang-tha-mo, after she
had eaten a hail-stone. S. 1-3. His flesh becomes iron. S. 2.
Mentioned in P . 3. He is called Don -grub in La, 1, GI. Ph. 3.6.
557245 Don-ldan, 'having a purpose,' name of the oldest son of the
King of heaven. S . 1.2. La. l. P . 3.
50 51 Don-yod, 'having a purpose,' name of the second son of the
King of heaven. S. 1-2. La. I. P . 3.
W50 *211 Don-yod-grub-pa, Amoghasiddha, guardian King of the
North. Offerings to him in M .R . 1.
Drag-lha-rgyal-mo, the 'terrible queen of the gods'; she
takes the place of Ma-tha-bkur-dman-rgyal-mo, when Kesar is in
the north. S. 8.2.
559 Drang-gi-lung-pa, the 'straight valley,' identical with
Crang-gi-lung-pa. P. 1.
55 | Drang-ge, the 'true one,' name of one of Kesar's servants,
S . 3.5.

343
Dri-mo-dgu-chod, said to mean 'smell of dung,' name of
the valloy, whoro Pa-sang-ldan-tu -akyes and Gog-bzang-tha-mo are
sont to. S. 3.2.
Drum -bu-brang-dkar, “lascivious, with a wbite breast,'
58159555 
name of a little dog, born to Khyi-mo-dkar-mo. LA. N .
5* 7481's Dre-zha-kham-ba, 'brown mules,' tended by Kesar. Gl.
Kh. 4.
| Dro-mo, the mother of all sheep. La. N . brought from Pa-chi.
dpal-Idong. She will be Ma-mo-kham -ba's comfort, when Pho-lags
mgo-geer goes to the north . $ . 1, 2-6. Dro-mo is a mistake for
gro-mo, brown.
Tong-ge, name of one of Kesar's servants. S. 3-5.
name of
bDud-cu-ru-lu-gu, the devil Cu-m -tu-gu, a 
455056ati 
Khyab-pa-lag-rings as well as of the King of Hor. S. 2, 3-6, 5-2.
Compare Cu-ru-lu-gu.
bDud-bya-ra-bhan-dre, 'dovil-watchman, the [Bud
455935151 
dhist] priest,' name of a devil subdued by the horse rKyang-byung
dbyer-pa. P. 3.
3141 bDul-risii-chu-mig, 'well of nectar,' literally : ‘of the
4557 
underneath
devil's honey,' name of a spring which has its origin 
bDud
identical with 
dBang-po-rgya-byin': throne. S. 2. Perhaps 
risz-'o-mai :hu-mig, 'well of nectar and milk ,' found in the land of
properties.
the devil. Lb. 4. It has medical 
the north. S. 5-2. Lb. 4.
of the devil,' in 
WU bDud-yul, 'land 
495 
The ogres Mon-pa and Mon-sring are sent thoro, after they have
snakes.
trouble in Klu -yul. They go there to eat poisonous 
given 
P. 1.

344
4552551 ODud-lha-cin, ( = goin ?) 'urine (?) of the gods,' name of
# devil. S. 2.9. The name lha-cin seems to be corrupted from
lHa-byin , pronounced lHa-jin , Devadatta .
8595TKT M A391 mDa-dkar-poi-lam -bstan, 'arrow , white
way-leader,' name of an arrow . It takes the place of mDa-mo-gaer ,
mda-mjug-rings, when Kesar goes to the north . S. 6.2. Agu d Pal
le aboots with this arrow and bits the heart-artery of the King of
Bor. Only Kesar is able to save the king. S . 3.8. It is also used
by Gyal-sa-dkar-po. P. 3. P . 4.
91595E 6 mDa-dpon-gong-ma, "high captain of the archers,'
name of the seventh of the eighteen agus. He has an arrow blado
instead of a hoad. $. 1. He belongs also to tho group of seven
agus. S. 7-7. Ho delivery captive Ang-gar-ltsangs-pa, by cutting
the rope of his cage with his arrow . $. 7.7. He finds out that
poison was put in 'aBru-gu-ma's beor. S . 7. He dios when Ri-bo
blon -chen is killed by dPal-moi-a-stag, when he is crushed to death
by the thumb of the falling giant. P. 3. He is advised to take
rebirth in 8Tang-tha . P. 3. He is Gong-ma-bu -thsa's father, P. 4.
m Da-mo-nag-poi-srog-chod , 'black arrow ,
taker of life,' name of one of rGyal-8a-dkar-po's arrows. P.3.4.
ganga A B7371 m Dâ - mo- dmar. poi - khrag- Idags,ʻred
arrow , blood-lickor,' name of one of rGyal-8a-dkar-po's arrows.
P. 3.4.
m Dā-mo-geer-mdā -mjug-rings, 'golden
arrow , long tail,' name of Kosar's arrow. It accompanies him to
the north. S. 6.2.
ImDung-dpal-'ajam -ring-mo, ' glorious, smooth
and long spoar.' Name of Kesar's spear. It is also called dPal
'ajam - ngon -mo, glorious, smooth and blue.' P. 3. S. 2 .

345
rDo-chod-ma, 'stone-cuttor,' name of a sword . Used by agu
Palle in S. 2, 6-4; by Kesar in S . 5.1. It is also called Do-ba
chod-ma. S. 6.2.
Do-rje-sem -dpā, Vajrasattva, guardian King of the
East; an offering to him mentioned in M .R . 1
IDem -ldem -mi-ldem -m Khat, ' shaky castle,' name
of a castle. It wails, when tho Gling-mkhar goes to the north ,
$. 2, 5.1. It takes the place of Gling-mkhar, when the latter goes
to the north. S. 6.2. Kegar goes there for meditation . P. 1, 4 ,
N AX S1 Dang-ma-8pyang-khra , 'angry wolf-falcon ,' apparently
the name of one of the agus. Lb . 3.
91281 Dig-pa, 'sin ,' 'sinful,' name of the giant-devil. La. 3.
1 sDig-pai-gri-gu-807-gsum , 'knife three fingers
long of the sinful,' Kesar's knife. Lb. 2.
9 *5 * 215 Dig-spyod-rgyal-po, 'King of sinful behaviour,' name
of the minister of the King of Hor. Lb. 5.
ན །
Nag-khra-glo-rings, 'black falcon, long lungs,' name
- of dPal-moi-a-slag's horse. S. 7.6. P. 4.
| Nag-thig.ma, the 'black-spotted woman (?),' name of the
second daughter of forefather mGar-ba . 8. 1. She is called &
younger sister of Gog-bzang-lha-mo in S. 2. Mentioned in P . 4.
Nag-po-kha-dkar, 'black with a white mouth ,' name of
the first of all donkeys. It is brought from Pa-chi-dpal-ldong
mkhar. S. l. The mother of Bong-bu-kham -pa. S. 2-8.

346
119.96 .45 Nag-shang-shang, 'the clever black man (1),' name of
the smith of Hor. Lb. 5.
2 1 Nang-gong, Baltistan; it is blessed with sweet apricote. P. 3.
Nub-phyoga-u-rgyan-gling, 'Udyāņa of the west,'
mentioned in M.R. 9.
gNam -khyed-ma-pha-li, shield comprising the sky,
name of Kesar's shield. 8.5.1.
Al gNam -stod-mthon-po, 'the high zenith,' the 'home
of gun and moon,' S. 5.), 'aBru-gu-ma goes there, G1, Kh. 6.
F F F11 Na-gYz-rna-risal, 'turquoise of the ear, sharp ear,'
name of the 17th of the group of 18 agus. S. 1. He belongs
also to the group of seven agna. S. 7.7. He is also called rNa
gYu-rna-'athal. According to P, 4, he jb mDa-dpon-gong-ma's son
and identical with Gong.ma-bu-thsa. He has a turquoise instead of
a head.
SA* 99 W $Nang-ba-mthā-yas, Amitabha, guardian King of the
West. Offøring to him in M .R . 1.
པ །
Pa-chi-d pal-dong, 'castle of treasures' (?). From this
castle the Liost usctul animals, seeds and treasures are brought.
S. 1.
Pa-le, probably identical with d Pal-le-rgod-po. P. 5. He has a
red tent.
INV52553V ! Pa-sang-ulan-rra-skyes, “possessing the Friday,
horns-growing,' name of the first of the 18 agus. He has a goat's

847
head. 8. 1. He is weaving in Grang-gi-lung.pa 6. 2. Me-me-rise
dgu calls him 'Kesar's father.' This is a lie. S. 3. His wife is
Gog-brang-tha-mo.
41051 Pan-chung, or Pan-jung, 'little Paņạit,' a name given to
Kenar in S. 3.4.
Pi-dbang-rgyal-chen , 'great king of the mico ' (pi-tse)
name of the king of the mice . P. 4.
Žiga Pi-dbang-blon-chen , 'great minister of the mice,' name
of the minister of the mice. P. 4.
* ** * *851 Pi-mo-gabr-ral-can, 'mouse with golden locks,' namo
of g $er-ri-bre-zhung's wife. P . 5 .
Horas Pi-loe-yul, 'land of mice.' P. 4.
2 Pe-nag, ‘black Pe (?),' name of the commander of the Mons of
Cling. 8.6.7.
grama "MY 11 dPal-mas-a-stag, ' glorious A-stag (?),' S. 2, naine
of the female agu. She takes 'aBru -gu-ma's place, when Kesar is
in the north. 8 . 6.2. She is called Kesar's wife (bTsun-mo) in
P . 3. She is the commander of the women of Gling. S . 6 .7. She
fights with a spear, S . 7.1, and belongs to the group of seven agus,
9. 7. She is sent after the spy of Hor who in reality is Kesar,
8. 7.6. Kegar reveals himself to her. She receiven Ang-gar-Ileange
pa in her arms, when he comes dropping down in his cage. A descrip .
tion of this heroine is given in P . 3. She has long hair, long teeth,
and long breasts. She fights against Ri-bo-blon-chen, the hero of
Gro-yul, and delivers Gyal-sa-dkar-po. P . 3. She is given as bride
to the wazir of China, and at the occasion of the dance begins to
kill the Chinese. P . 4.
garanwaldPal-yul, 'glorious country,' the home of dPal-mai-a-slag.
P. 4.

348
ga wal dPal-bo-yul, 'glorious country,' perhaps identical with
Bal-po-yul, Nepal, 'aBru-gu-ma knows it from hearsay. GI. Ph. 8 .
ggjara dPal-le-rgod-po (rgod -po = rgad-po), 'the old glorious
one,' name of the 16th of the 18 agus. He has an old man's head.
S. 1. He is called the son of a smith 's daughtor; she could not
walk at first. Then he became a great archer, 8. 6.2. He kills
'a-Bu-dmar-lam -batan's murderer, Shang-kra -mi-ra, but forgets to
save the latter's life. $. 6-4. He is called tho commander of the
heroes of Gling. S. 6.7. P. 2. Ho belongs to the group of seven
agus. P. 2. Ho hits the heart-ertery of the King of Hor with hia
arrow . S. 7.6. He almost kills 'a Bru-gu-ma in his rage. He goes
to lang yul. P . 4 . According to La, 6 he sits on a throne of shell,
He is connected with sholl and lead. La . 8. He also kills the devil.
bird in assisting dBang-po-brgya-byin , and asks the latter to serd
Kesar to earth. He also brings the treasures from Pa-chi-dpal.
Idong to Gling. La. 1. 8. 1.
garraial dPal-le-pa, the 'glorious ones,' or perhaps better Pal-le.
pa , ' frying -pans,' for their lives are contained in frying-pana. Name
of seven ogres (srin-po). P. 6.
VERDT Pang-stod -mthon -po, 'the high meadow,' the home
of 'a Brong-chen-kham -pa. S. 5.1.
S'# 747587 8Po-mtho-nang-ma (or sPro-mtho, etc.), 'inner place of
high pleasure,' name of the hunting place which was made out of
the ogro's little stomach. See the account of the oroation of the
world. S. 1, 2. P. 4 ,
5176572 SPyang-ku-mjug-zlum , the bushy-tailed wolf.' He
ooses his strength on the Srar-pass. Gl. Kb. 6.
$95 861 9Pyan-mig-bzang ( = Mig-mi-bzang), Virupaksha,
guardian King of the West. M .R . 4.

349
༥ །
** * N ITI Pha-lha-sKyer-rdzong-anyan.po, 'the father-ged
the well-sounding (speaking ?) & Kyer-rdzong (?),' name of the highest
Tibetan God, who is often identified with Indra. S . 2. P . 3.4 .
In S. 6 -2, we find the spelling Phas-lha ( m pha-sla )-Ker-zong-anyan.
po. He is called Pha-tha-enyan-po in M .R . I.
Phad-khra-bo, 'the many coloured bag,' (a cloud ?), born to
dkur-moi-stong-shong. 8. 2.6.
KNEZEI Phas-lha-rab-tha ( Pha-ola-rab.lha), 'father-god, real
god '; he takes the place of Pha- ha-ekyer-rdzong-anyan-po, when
Kesar is in the north . 8 . 6.2.
1959 '851 Pho-rog-nag-chung, 'the little black crow,' it looses its
strength on the Srar-pass. GI. KH. o.
22409201 Pho-rog-'abyang-shes, 'crow of pure wisdom ,' name
of two crows of the King of Hor. S. 6 -1. They are killed by
'aBu-dmar-lam -betan .
Pho-lags-mgo-geer, the 'yollow -headed ram ,' name
of a ram . It goes to the north with Kesar. S , 5 -1.
2121525791 Pho-lad-gyad-grhu, the 'hero's bow of stoel,' name of
Kesur's bow . S. 2. It was robbed by King Gur-dKar of Hor.
S . 6 .4. P. 3. The heroes of Hor try in vain to bend it. Kesar
alone is able to do so. The King of Hor is caught with its string.
8. 7-5.
Pho-lad-di-ste-po-rong-chod , stoel-axe which cuts
of itself,' name of an axe, born to Zla -ba-dkar-po. S. 2-8. It may
bo identical with Pho-lad-dkar-poi-steb -chung, mentioned in S . 7-2.
a Phags-skyed, Virudhaka, guardian King of the South
• Montioned in M .R . 4 .

350
བ །
8155551 Ba-lu-tung-tung, the 'white dwarf '; le makes arrange
ments for Kesar's and 'a - Bru-gu-ma's marriage feast. S . 7.3.
(Ba-lu = r Ba-lu .)
| 9485 KCX , Ban-chung-song-po, the little priest-vegabond, name
given to Kesar by the people of Oling. P. 3.
Bar-btsan , the firm place in the middle,' name of the earth .
Its colour is red. Compare the Indian Baghwa colour. S. 2. The
nyo pas from there go to Gro -yul. P. 3 .
qalmaty Bal-khol-ma, 'wool-sorvant' (?), servant girl of the smith
of Hor. S. 7.5.
Sa' 'V Bi-la-khra-sug, the 'many-coloured cat,' born to Bs-la
nag-mo. She wails on account of Bi-la -nag-chung's departure for
the north. $ . 5 .1.
51 Bi la-nag-chung, the ' little black cat’; ho acoompanies
F
Kesar to the north. $. 5 .1.
R' ATI Bi-la -nag-mo, the 'black she-cat,' the mother of all cats.
S . 1. She was brought from Pa-chi-dpal-kdong castle. The mother
af Bi-la -khra -sug. S. 2-8 .
3568 Bu-sangs, Purang ; a Tibotan provinco east of Guge ; the name
bu -hrange sooms to mean 'children only.' It is blessed with beauti
ful girls. P . 3.
Burig , Purig, province between Lower Ladakh and Kashmir.
The name seems to mean clover boys.' It is blessed with white
wheat and flowers. P . 3. It is famous for its white wheat. S. 7,
and I.

361
Î n av Be-da-rkang-rings, the 'Be-da with long legs”; he is
in command of the Be-da (a low caste ) of Gling. He may be
identical with rKang- kang-rings. 8. 6.7. P. 3.
Ben-po, 'pitchor (?),' 'pestilence (1),' name of a Bon-po priest
who ran a race with a Buddha on mount Ti-se. P. 3. Compare a
similar tale in Mi-la -ras-pa.
* * * SENT| Ber-ka-thsom -shing-khru-sup, the ‘many.coloured
stick of gay colours,' (khru -sug = khra -sug) name of a stick belonging
to the dwarfe. It has tho power to provide every thing its
possessor wants to get. $. 7.1.
Bong-thil, 'middle part of a donkey,' name of 'aBru-gu-ma's
sling. P. 1.
Bong-nag-ldum -bu, 'black ass, lettuco,' name of the
14th of the 18 agus. He has a donkey's head. S. 1. He goes to
the horse market. Seo Lb. 6 .
'S1021 Bong-bu-kham -pa, 'brown ans,' name of a donkey, boru
to Nag-po-kha-dkar, S. 2.8. Apparently identical with Bong-mo.
kham -ba, S. 5 .1.
R ! Bong-mo-kham -ba, the 'female brown donkey.' Sho
vails on account of Gya-bong-kha-dkar's departure for the north.
S. 5-1.
599 Bod -Yul, 'Tibet, mentioned in M .R . 5.
Bor-gar, Bulgaria , a country famous for its leather, (Russian
leather). S. 5 .1. Apparently identical with Bo-gar, mentioned in
P . I, as a country famous for its powder.
SpWTF21 Bya-khw-yug-rgyal-po, 'bird cuckoo, the king,' name
of the grandfather of the sun-bird . S. 1,

352
Bya-khrung-khrung-dkar-mo, the white storks,
*BE 555m 
name of the birds that were sent to fetch Kesar back from
bDud-yul. S. 6.4. These birds are white storks or cranes.
SAN T Bya-rgyal-rgod-po, the 'wild (or: old ?) king of the
birds'; he is born to Gog-bzang-tha-mo, S. 2.7. La. N . Lb. 1. His
nest is found on the second bouglı of the tree of the world . He has
a turquoise egg. M . R . 8 .
g ' 5B51 Bya-chen-khyung, the 'great bird Khyung ' (garuda); her
nest is on the first bough of tle tree of the world . She has a
golden egg. M .R . 8.
1 Bya-nyi-ma-khyung-rung, the 'sun -bird.' S. l. Kesar
cuts off his wing. S . 3-6. A description of this bird is given in
P . 3, ps, 290, 291. The spelling Khyung-dkrung is also found.
Bya-phran-shog-thog, tho 'little bird with wings,' born
935: 
to Gog-bzang-lhu-mo. S. 2.7.
Bya-dbang-ldan-dbang-phyug, 'bird , rich in
5596 *255453991 
powder '; the father of Shel-Idang-lha-mo. P . 3.
gXT5 Bya-mo-dkar-mo, the 'white hen,' (probably the moon),
the wife of Bya-nyi-ma-khyung-rung, S. 3.6. Kusar lives with her
for one month. According to L , No. 9, she is the wife of the sun.
biril.
go 's Bya-mo-Ido-re, 'bird 110-re (?),' a bird sent to Kesar by the
Chinese. S. 4.1.
Bya -thsang-mai-yul, the land of all the birds,' or Bya
yul, 'bird -land '; the home of Bya-nyi-ma-khyung-rung. S. 3-6.
Bya- ong-ido-re, 'bird 'Ong-Ido-re,' the father of the sun
gĞER 
bird. S. l. ('urupare , ** udo-re.

353
9 9 9 Bya-shog-thog, the 'bird with wings.' Ho wails, when the
woods go to the north. S. 5.1. Compare Bya-phran-shog-thog.
graag& 51 Bya-80-mig-dmar, “bat red-eye,' the younger brother
of the sun-bird. S. l. He must guard the way of the sun. S . 3.6.
Kesar kills him with his arrow, before killing Bya-khyung-rung-nyi
ma. S. 3-6.
9 1 Byang-thang, 'northern plain ,' the steppe-district, north-east of
Ladakh . It is blessed with salt and wools . P. 3.
Byang-phrug, 'child of the north ,' name of the tiny servant.
boy of Gling. He rides on Dung-ri-dar-dkar. Ho may be identical
with Gong-ma-bu-thsa. P . 3.
as 1 55 | Byil-phrug-rgan-jar, the “naked little bird '; he is
born to Gog-bzang-tha-mo in the field. La. N .
991 T1 Brag-slod -mthon-po, 'the high rock .' It is the home
of Kyin -chen-la-rgan. S. 5.1.
39983 55551 Brag-thsan-dung-dung, ( = rdung ?) the 'clapping
rocks (?),' the opening and shutting rocks. (Scylla and Charybdis.)
S. 7-1, 2. The tail of Kyang-rgod -dbyer-pa is caught in this door,
On Kesar's return journey this door opens only, whon the heads of
'a Bru-gu -ma's children are thrown against it. S. 7-9. Lb. 8.
29429 Brag-bzangs-po, 'good rock,' or is it 'copper rock '?
The home of the nine-headed ogre. S. I,
51 Blon -po-mig-dmar, ‘ministor red -oye,' name of a
minister of IJung-yul (apparently). He is killed by rGyal-bu-shel
dkar. P . 4 .
T' EST | Bhag-udzom -mo, the 'assembled private parts,' name of a
maid-servant of the King of Hor. Lb. 5 .

354
dBang- po-rgyab-zhin (or rgya-bzhin , originally brgya
sbyin ), Satakratu, Indra . Name of the highest god . S . 1. P . 4 .
La. 1. M .R . 1. He was identified with the old Tibetan god &Kyer
rdzong-anyan-po. Compare Ika-yi-dbang- po-rgyab-bzhin .
Bus-gtsang, name of the two principal provinces of Central
Tibot. They are famous for their tea. S. 7-1. P. 3. M .R . 5.
295 21519 ! 'aBu-dkar-ldum -bu, “white (round ?) worm ,' name of
one of the dragons, killed by Kesar, S. 4.3.
RIRI 'aBu-khang, ‘house of dragons,' the greatest sight in China.
S . 4.3.
pgf ' ail 'aBu-nag-Idum -bre, 'black round (?) worm ,' name of
one of the dragons, killed by Kesar in China. S. 4-3.
Begaw ay ! 'aBu-dmar-lam -ostan , fred worm , way-leader,
name of the ninth of the 18 agus. He has a worm 's or insect's head,
S . l. He is of the size of a thumb; he will be 'aBru-gu-ma's comfort,
when Kesar goes to the north . S. 5-1. Then he takes Kesar's
place. S . 6.). He is in possession of a rib-shing (Nobelkappe), to
make himself invisible. He is a great archer. S. 6.2. His body is
of steel, but underneath his shoulder there is a piece of flesh of the
size of a mirror. He is killed by Shankramiru 's arrow , whon he
was drinking water at & mill. S . 6 .4. He is called a father in
P. 3. Also mentioned in Lb. 8.
'aBu-gser-ldum -bu, ' golden round (?) worm ;' name of
one of the dragons, killed by Kesar in China. S. 4-3.
'aBum -khri-rgyal-po, 'King of 100,000 thrones,' name
of the King of the gods. Gl. Ph. 5.
aBum -khri-rgyal-mo, ' queen of 100,000 thrones,' name
of the queen of the gods. GI. Ph. 5.

355
gaļ 'aBri-gu-ma, 'Yak-cow,' one of the names of 'aBru -gu-ma,
S. 1, 3.7. Compare Lb. 5.27, 28, where 'a Bru -gu-ma is called 'aBri.
mo, 'yak-cow .'
ATATI 'aBru-gu-ma, 'a little grain,' or if it was developed from
'aBri-gu-ma, by assimilation of the vowel of the first syllable to
that of the second 'little yak-cow,' name of Kesar's principal wife.
8. 2. She was carried off by the King of Hor and regained by
Kesar. Ş. 5, 6. She was instructed by lamas and received the
name of Shes-can-tha-mo 'goddege of wisdom ,' GI. Ph. 4. She is
the mother of gSer-ri-bu-zhung. P. 5. Compare Jo-jo-'abru -gu-ma
and la-Brug-mo.
འབྲུག་མོ། 
'a Brug-mo, “female thunder,' probably a contracted form of
'aBru-gu-ma. Lb. 4.
Mr. Van Manen kindly favours me with the following important
note in his letter of the 8-10-25. In my Hor-gling MS. quite in the
beginning I find this important passage, occurring in the part relating
the birth of 'aBrug-mo :--
ཡ་སྔོན་གུང་ནས་འབྲུག་གཅིག་གྲགས།
དོགས་མོ་ས་ལ་ལྕམ་གཅིག་སྐྱེས།
དཀར་ཡག་གངས་ལ་སེང་གེ་འགྱིངས།
སེང་ལྕམ་འབྲུག་མོ་དེ་ནས་ཐོགས།
From the contre of the heavens a peal of thunder bounded.
On the narrow earth a lady was born.
On the white good ice a lion strutted.
Hence she was given the name of Lion-Lady-Thunder,
BATIMI 'aBrus-si ( = kyi) ka, 'varved pillar,' name of a pillar in
the castle of Hor. It was the heart-artery of the King of Hor.
Lb. 6.
BETTAT | 'aBrong-ka-ra-kham -pa, 'brown wild yak of sugar,
name of a hugo yak which guards the road to Hor; (a cloud or an

356
avalanche (1) ). He devours Keyar and his horse. He is killed by
Korar who cuts his entrails. S. 7.2.
'a Brong-ka-ra-rin-chen , 'wild yak , precious sugar,
apparently a name of Lag-dmar-blon-chen. P. 3.
BFT S I 'a Brong-[d]kar-ral-ril, 'wild yak with long white (?)
hair," name of a yak, killed by Kesar in his soventh yenr. Lb. 8.
21 'aBrong-chen-kham -pa, thc 'big brown yak,' name of
a yak born to Gog-bzang-tha-mo, S. 2.7, identical with 'aBrong-chen .
ri-ri.
BE I 'aBrong-chen-ri-ri, 'big yak’; ri-ri is an exclamation
used when tending yaks. $. 3-5. Identical with the preceding,
PJESE 351771 'a Brong-byung-rog-po, 'wild offspring of the wild yak,'
born to Gog-za-lha-mo. LX . N . Lb. 1.
arai Bang-char-zil-bu, tho 'dowy soaking rain '; he is the
creator of height and depth. M .R. 3.
Bal-khang-gru-bzhi, the 'four-cornered house of the
NAISTAĞI 
dwarfs,'(sbalu = dwarf), nanie of the castle of the dwarfs. As it is
warm in winter, it is offered to Kesar as a winter-retreat. S. 7.1.
Bal-ti, Baltistan. The name Beems to be connected with sBa.
lu, "dwarf.' It is praised on account of its a pricots. $. 7.1.
s Bal-mo-Khrol-'adzom -mo, 'female dwarf, splen
dour united '; name of the female dwarf who entored one of the
dice. S. 7.1.
Bal-mo-khrol.le-mo, 'female dwarf of splendour.'
a
y
Name of a lady.dwarf. S. 7.1.
yer55951 $Ba-lu-dung-dung ( = rdung ?), 'dwarf beater' (?), name
of the dwarf who has power over the opəning and shutting door of
3B

357
rock, over the stones, flying about between hoaven and earth, and
over the yak 'aBrong-ka-ta-kham -ba. S. 7.1.
SUR SES 1 Ba-lui-lam -prangs, 'street of the dwarfs.' Kesar
passes by it on his way to Hor. $. 7.1.
ORANT &Bi-chu-rabs, (sbi = spyi ?), “genera) ford (?),' name of the
chief of all fords. S. 2. The best part of it given to Kesar. $ . 3.2
མ །
Ma-gog-bzang-tha-mo, third daughter of forefather
mbar-ba of Cling. $. 1. Soe Gog-bzang-tha-mo.
989591 Ma-the-ma-bdag, (unintelligible) name of an unknown
country; the nyo-pas from there go to Gro-yul. P. 3.
61*35 | Ma-phang, instead of Ma-'apham , “unconquered ,' the Mana
sarowar lake. Lb. I.
GT8121 Ma-ma-kham -pa, the 'brown ewe' She wails on account
of Pho-lags-mgo-geer's departure for the north. $. 5.1.
5 *8212211 Ma-sal-sal, name of a pass on the road from Gling to
Hor. $. 7.
Ma-tha-bkur-dman-rgyal-mo, 'Mother-goddess,
honourable queen '; or Ma-ola Mas-lha, etc.; name of the queen of
heaven. S. 2. Compare bkur-dman-royal-mo. The protecting
mother-deity of Kosar. He prays to her, when he is in danger,
hardly ever to his paternal deity Pha-lha-skyer-rdzong-enyan-po.
P . 3-4 . S. 5-2.
159501851 Mi-dbang-ral-chung, 'ruler of men, little lock [of
hair),' name of a hero of king lHo-krab-rgyal-po. He is called
bDud. P. 4.

358
T 525 | Mi-dbang-ral-chen, ruler of men, large lock [of hair),'
namo of a hero of King lHo-krab-rgyal-po. P . 4 .
1 Mi-yul, land of men,' identical with Bar-btsan 'a Dram -bu
gling, ote. S. 2.9. GI. Kh. 1.
i - yul- la - med - pai-grod - pa - che, great
stomach, is is not found in the land of men.' Name of one of
the soven Agus. Ho eats 100 sheep at a sitting. P . 2.
Mig-dmar, see Blon-po-mig-dmar.
Mig-si-ri-ral-gri, ‘sword glory of the eye,' name of a
sword which takes the place of Do.chod-ma, when Kesar is in the
north .
KANNF1 Me-me-mthsams-pa, 'grandfather hermit,' name of
Yabs-thon -pa's uncle; possibly identical with Slob-dpon-rise-dou .
S. 4.1.
Mo-ngan-ni-srong phrug (Mo-Mon, Indian) 'the bad
Mon, street chill,' name of Kosar in his ugly form . Abridged
Srong-po. S: 3, 2, 4. La. 5.
Mon-rkang-khyil, tho Von round (oval ?) legs.' Name of
the principal yo-pa (bride-biddor) of the Mons. P . 3.
WIMIN W Mon-gces-pa, the 'doar Mon,' Kosar's friond. He is
killed by the Agus, and two children, Mon-pa and Mon-sring, comme
out of luis stoinach. P. I.
51571 Mon-pa, 'the Mon ' (Indian ); name of the male ogre that came
out of Mon -gces-pa's stomach. P. I.
1 Hon-sring, ‘sister of the Mon ’; name of the feniale ogre:
that caine out of Jon-goes-pa's stomach. P . 1,

359
$ 
1
1 T'se-tse-ngang-dmar, 'goat red-duck,' name of the goat
that causes Kesar's death in heaven. La. 3. According to La. N .
she is the mother of all goats.
A555507 brТsan-ria-dmar-chung, ' firm horse, little red one,'
name of mother sKyabs-mdun's horse. La, 7.
550 l Teid-bu-skye-dmar, the ‘red-necked ho-goat.' He goos
to the north. $. 5.1. Compare Ra-skyes-skye-dmar.
19 7'sug-rna-rin-chen, (gTsug-sna ?), 'various precious
sciences (?), name of a Nāga; Kesar plays at dice with him . P. 1.
T T'se-dgu, ' nine summits,' name of an old hermit in Grang-gi.
lung-pa. S. 1. Kosar asks him who is his father. S. 3-1. He
is the commander of the lamas of Gling, S. 6.7. See also P. 1, 4.
EXZT T'se-lha-snyan-po, ‘melodious (well-speaking ?) god of the
summit.' An offering brought to him . M .R . 1.
mThsal-mig, 'red eye,' name of the little sheep, born to
Dro -mo. La, N .
515 2519151 mThso-mo-ma-pang, see Ma-phang. P. 4.
Way 5651551 mThsom -stod -mthon-po 'the high lake,' the home of
Nya-mo-geer-mig, S. 5.1. GI. Kh. 6.

ÂT
KX S ER5351. Dze-mo-bam-za-bam-skgia, hundred-fold happi
ness,' name of Cu-tu-lu-gu's wife. She becomes Kesar's wife, when
he kills the devil. A daughter is born to them . S. 5. Lb. 2, 3.
Dze-mo is an abbreviation of mDzes-mo, beautiful lady.
7755 m 1 mDzo-pho-rkang-dkar, ‘male mdzo white foot,' namo
of Kosar's mdzo used for ploughing. He was born to mDzo-mo-tu
yon. $. 2.8. S. 5.1.
mDzo-mo-ru-yon, the 'female mdzo with crooked horns,'
the mother of all cattle. S. 1, 2.8; 5.1.
Tas 'aDzam -bu-gling (or ’a Dzam -gling), Jambudvipa, the same
88 mi-yul. S. 2.9. GI. Kh. 1. It is coverod by the leaves of the
treo of the world .
Wa-mo-'abyol-li, the 'vixen who is clever in hiding.'
She lives in the Lung-pa-chen-mo. Identical with Wa-Ise-'abyol-mo.
S. 5-1.
IT
a la, perhaps za-ba originally; 'the eater,' name of an agu or giant.
La. 3.
AN T Zangs-dkar, 'white copper,' name of a province south-west
of Ladakh. It is blessed with red yaks (or yak-butter ?). P. 3.
A STI Zangs-be-kha-chod, 'kettle with a cover,' born to Zangs
bu-kha-yon. S. 2.8.

361
N 'T'AWI Langs-bu-kha-yon, 'copper-kettle with the crooked
mouth ,' perhaps the moon, the 'chief or utensils. It is brought
to Gling from Pa-chi-dpal-Idong. S. 1.9.
a& * °591951 Zam -pa-dgu-thud, ( = 'athud)'ninefold prolonged bridge.'
Name of a bridge on the road to Hor. S. 7.2.
| Zla-ba , 'the moon ,' born to Gog-bzang-tha-mo. His home is
gNum -stod-mthon -po. S. 2.7. In M .R . 3, he is called Zla -mthsan
dkar-po, the 'white moon. He is the creator of north and south .
A TKI Zla -ba-dkar-po, the 'white moon,' name of the eighteenth
of the 18 agus. He has a white shell instead of a head . S. l.
According to P. 3 he is Zla-ba-bzang-po's son.
a ' s | Zla-ba-dkar-po, the white moon , the principal of all
axes or hatchets. It is brought to Cling from Pa-chi-dpal-Idong.
S . 1.
Zla -ba -bzang po, 'good moon,' name of the sixth of the
18 agus. He has a moon instead of a head. S. 1. He is in charge
of the horses of Gling and is 1,050 years old . P . 3.
ma-rigs-kyi-mkha-'agro-ma , 'milk -white
fairy '; a name of 'a Bru-gu-ma. Gl. Ph. 4.
'Og-klu , the flower Nāgas,' name of the realm of the Nāgas,
It is of blue or black colour. S . 2. The Nyo-pas go from there tu
Gro-yul. P. 3.
Zavargs 1 'Ol-la -dar, ‘black silk (?),' name of Gur-dkar's and 'aBru
gu-ma's son. Lb. 6 .

362
ཡ །
wagga51 Yabs-{m }thon-pa, 'high father,' name of 'aBru-gi-ma's
father. Occasionally he is called Yabs-brtan-po, ' firm father.'
$. 1, 2, 3
Yab-brtan -pa, or Yab-bstan -pa, see above. S . 4, 7 -2 .
La 6.
Yar-khyen , Yarkand. It is famous for its high-headed '
horses. S. 7.1.
Yum -ongon -mo, 'blue mother,' name of 'aBru-gu-ma's
mothor. S. 1, 2, 3-4.
wag 51 Yul-'akhor-srung, Dhỉtaráshța, King of the east.
M .R . 4 .
Yul-mjug-gi- -bi, grandmother from the end of the
village,' name of the grandmother who gives advice to dPal-le as
well as to Gur-dkar. S. 6 -4.
War 1 Yul-thra-anyan-po, melodious (or: well-speaking) vil
lage-idol (?). An offering to it in M .R. 1.
9 :55 *215 | gya-nang-gi-la-tir-ra , 'weasel of the inner slate,'
name of the weasel that will be Bi-mo-khra-sug's comfort, when Bi.
In-nag-chung goes to the north , S. 5 .
AVEVO gyu-lcang-sngon-mo, the 'blue turquoise-willow ,' a
metaphor for the tree of the world. M .R. 5.
Yu-nya-zungs-gcig, H 'pair of turquoise fishes,'
thoy belong to those treasures of Gling-mkhar which are carried off
by King Gur-dkar. $. 6.4.

363
WASAIETAR1 g.Yu-'abrug-lha-khang, 'temple of the turquoise thun
der,' name of Kesar's hermitage. Also 'a Brug-mo goes to this
place for meditation. Lb. 5.
ATNAM gYu-sbal-ongon-po, the 'blue turquoise frog,' born to
Gog- -tha-mo in gyóg-klu . La. N . He is called Kesar's younger
brother in 8. 2.
A Z T QYu-ma-pho-ron , the 'turquoise pigeons ’; they loose
their strength on the Star-pass. GI. Kh. 5. 'a Bru-gu-ma takes.
the shape of one of them . Gl. Kh. 6. GI, Ph. 6 .
IgYu-ral-can, ' possessing locks of turquoise colour,' name
of the daughter of minister Mig-dmar of Gro-yul. P. 3.
TV2151 Yu-ral-can, “possessing locks of turquoise colour,' name
of a child of 'a Bru-gu-ma and the King of Hor. $. 7... Lb. 6.
gYui-dkon-mchog-mo, 'turquoise jewel,' name of
the daughter of the King of China, S. 4 .3.
Ru-gan -gyi-ri, ‘hill of brune. It is situated on the road to
Dri-mo-dgu-chod. S. 3.4.
Ra-ma-dkar-mo, 'white goat," the mother of Ra-skyes
skye-dmar; she is brought from Pa-chi.dpal-Idong. S . l. S . 2.8 .
She wails on account of Teid .bu -skye-dmar's departure for the
noi ih. N . 5 .1.
* SF * ! Ra-skyes-skye-dmar, ‘Kid red-neck,' mane of' Kesar's
goat, bom to Ra-ma-skye-dmar. 8. 2.8.
Ra-dbyug, 'gont-sling,' name of 'a Bru-gu-ma's sling. P. I.

364
Ri-dkar-po-nag-po-dmar-po-goum , 'the
wbito, black, and red hill, the three, Kesar goes there for medita
tion , before going to China. S. 4.).
| Ri-gu-kha-ongon, ‘Kid blue-mouth'; he will be Re-ma.
dkar-mo's tomfort, when rtsid -bruskye-dmar goes to the north.
S . 5.1.
rawal Ri-rgyal-blon -chen , 'King of the mountains, great minis
ter.' He is killed by Kesar in his 12th year. Gl. Kh. 3.
Ri-bo-blon -chen , ‘mountain , great minister,' name of a
giant hero of Gro-yul. P . 3. He drinks the water of the ocean at
a gulp .
g15 | Ri-bya-gong-mo, the 'superior snow -partridge '; her nest is
on the fifth bough of the tree of the world ; she has a coral egg
M .R . 8 .
Ri-wa-blon-chen, see Ri-bo-blon-chen .
kopā 352191 Rin-chen-byung-dan, 'producer of jewels,' Ratna
sattva, name of the guardian King of the South. M .R . 1.
a l Ro-nyai-ri, ‘hill of lead'; it is situated on the road to Drin
mo-dgu.chod, S. 3.4.
Rong-yul, ' place of defiles,' name of the Indus valley above
Sle. It is famous for its rifles. S. 5.1. P. 1.
24 TT Ron -btsan-khro-mo, 'hot anger' (1), one of Kesar's
enemies. La. N.
ལ །
21599 La-dvags, 'pags, game,' (?) name of the district of Sle, map,
Leh , it is famous for its jewels. S. 7.1. It is blessed with tiger-like
heroes. P. 3.

365
AT 5 * | Lag-dmar-blon-chen, 'Great minister rod-hand,'
name of one of the ministers of Gro-yril. He rides on a blue black
horse, and has fire in his mouth . He is called bdud (devil). He is
killed by Gyal-sa-dkar-po. P. 3.
A ' RE Lag-lag-rings, ‘Long hand,' name of the twelfth of the
18 aguig. He has a hand instead of a head. $. 1. He belongs to the
group of seven agus according to P . 2 . Together with Kang-rkang.
rings he constructs a watorcourse and leads the water of the sea to
the castle of Gro-yul. P. 2.
BTS | Lug-dro-mo, see Dro-mo (Gro-mo).
rug-por-ze, 'sleep gokten mouth ,' name of the sheep, born
to Lug-dro-mo. $. 2.8.
ETTI Lung-pa-chen-mo, 'great valley,' the homu of Wa-mo
njol-li (or abyol-li). 8.5.1.
r9 T
Sha-run-dre-ba-ran-dre, the words shar, 'East' and
bun-dhe, 'Buddhist priest' are apparently contained in this word.
Name of the three devils of the east who try to kill young Kesar.
S. 2.
95*7*85951 Shang-ku-mjug-rdum , the 'wolf with the bushy tail.'
His home is Thang-stod-mthon-po. S. 5.1.
9509551 Shang-mo-'adur, the 'trotting female wolf,' name of a
pass on the road from Gling to Hor. 8. 6.
999* * 1 Shan-kra-mi-ru, a general of the Hor army (apparently
not Tibetan). He kills 'aBu- mar-lam -bstan, when the latter drinks
water at u well. Then he is killed by dPal-le-rood-po, who flays him
and fills his skin with sand. S. 6-2, 4.

366
Shar-gangs-ri-dkar-po, the white ice-mountain of
the east '; name of the place , where a race was run by rGyal-sa
dkar-po and Mig-dmar. P. 3.
Shar-phyogs-bde-chen-gling, the 'happy land of
the east,' mentioned in M.R. 9.
q u 92959501 Shar-si-an-dhe-ban-dhe-bdun, tho‘seven (Bud
dhist] priests of the east,' compare the Shar-Tan-dre-ba-ran-dre,
above. (The spelling An-dre-ba-ran-dre is also found.) La. 5. Lb.
8. Eiglitoen of them are burn together with Kesar. Three of
them are killed by Kesar in his 8th yoar. G1. Kh. 3.
96391 Shing-rgyal, “King of trees,' possibly a name of the tree of the
world. It is planted before dBang-po-rgya-bzhin's house. $. 2.
Shug-pa-khan-tre-tig-tra-rol-ma, ' Tārā of the
bitter juniper-tree and of the Gentiana'; nickname of Go-chod. P. 3.
9215 TK | Shel-dkar, 'white crystal,' name of Kosar's son . He is killed
by the king of Hor. Lb. 4.
qoray Shel-mkhar, name of the castlo of Gro-yul, Princess Shel
Idang-Iha-mo is born there. P . 3.
qarma 9 1 Shel-lcam -'abru-gu-ma, a Bru-gu-ma the crystal
wifo'; a name of Kosar's wife. S. 2. She is walking in heaven ,
GI. Kh. 1, and famous for her wisdom , Gl. Ph . 2.
Shel-ljam , see Shel-lcan .
Shel-Idang-lha-mo, (Idang = ldan ?) the crystal goddess,'
name of the princess of Gro-yul. P . 3. When she is born, the
world is filled with light. Kesar is called her father (father-in -law ?).
She is robbed by the prince of China and brought back by dPal-moi
2-slag, the female agu . She offends Shel-li-bu-zhung by asserting
that he belongs to the low caste of smiths. P . 4.

367
waarõigas ļ Shel-li-bu-zhung (Shel-gyi-bu-chung), 'Little boy of
Crystal,' name of the 10th of the 18 agus. He has a concave mirror
instead of a head. S. l. His tale in P . 3. He ie a child without
a father (supposed to be Kesar's child ). He is identical with rGyal.
bu-rgyal-sa. P. 3. He destroys the garden of the old women hy fire
and restores it again . According to P . 5 he is identical with gSer.
gyi-bu-chung. See also Lb. 6.
781153 Sh Shol-dung-nya - shing.chu - thug - rol-ma,
Tārā of the plough , yoke and leather-strap. A vickname of Go.
chod. P . III.
ས །
V a li Sa-si-can-la, 'pass of the mountains of the earth ,' name of
the pass, to which Kesar send lightning. GI. Kh. 9.
Sang-sang-tha -'abrog, (sang = gsang?), 'secret oasis
of the gods,' name of Kesar's watch -hill. P. 1.
Sungs-rgyas, Buddha; he ran a race on mount Kailāsa with
a Bon -po priest. P. 3. A knite to stab Buddha is mentioned in
La, 3.
Si-kyim , Sikhim ; a rope from $ i-kyim is mentioned in $. 7-2.
$ 5651 Sitar-rām , Sitã and Rāma, mentioned as inhabitants of
Ha-yul. Gl. Kh. 7.
K a y Sing-chen -rgyal-po, the 'King, the great lion ,' # name
of Kısar. Gl. Ph. 2.
Ringa n Sing-phrug-legs-mo, the 'good child of the lion,'
name of the child of Seng-ge-dkar-mo-gyu-ral-can. S. 2, 9.

368
1 Seng-ge-dkar-mo-gyu-ral-can , the white
lioness with the turquoise locks'; the glacior; born to Gog-bzang
Iha-mo. S. 2, 7. La. N . Lb. 1.
2 2 Seng-chen -rgyal-tham , the great and divine lion
king,' a name of Kesar. Lb. 6.
Sog-bcings-sog-ma-bcings, straw -binder (?),'
name of a girl, given to gSer-ri-bu -zhung by the ogre dPal-le-pa .
After the battle he drowns her in the pond of blood . P . 5.
91951 Srag-pa-cun-dru, the 'earless partridges”; they loose
their strength on the Srar-pass. GI. Kh. 5 .
Srar-gyi-la , 'rigorous pass,' name of a difficult pass on the
road to Hor. $. 7.1. For Kesar's prayer on that pass see GI. Kh. 5.
Compare A -srar-srar-gyi-la .
Srin -gzhu-ongon-po, the 'blue bow of the Ogres,' namo
of Kesar's bow. La. 3.
Srin -po-mgo-dgu , 'ogre with nine heads,' name of the
ogre with nine heads, out of whose body the world (Gling) is
formed. $ . 1.
0911749 91 Srin-po-rag-shu, 'ogre rākshasa,' name of an ogre.
S. 4-1.
* * **** Srin -po-ro-ne-mo, ogress corpse eater,' name of an ogresa,
famous for her red cheeks: S . 4-1. In Lb. 8 her name is spelled
Srin-mo-ro-ne-mo.
y a Srub-lha, name of a festival. P. 4. (Harvest-festival.)
Srog-dgu -pa , 'man of nine livos,' name of a minister of the
king of Hor. S. 7.2.

369
gSer-gyi-me-tog-mkhar, ' castle of golden flowers,
name of the castle of minister Mig-dmar of Gro-yul. P. 3.
Ser-gyi-a -rag-jo-jo, lady of the golden arack,
name of the wife of minister Mig-dmar of Cro-yul. P. 3.
gSer-nya-zunge-gcig, a pair of golden fishes';
they belong to the treasures of Gling-mkhar, carried off by king
Gur-dkar. S . 6.4.
A TT I gSer-poi-goer-mkhar, ‘golden castle,' name of
the castle of the king of Hor. It begins to shake, when Kesar turns
up his sleeves. Lb. 6 .
gSer-ral-mkhan, 'having golden locks,' name of a son
of minister Mig-dmar of 'agro-yul. P . 3. Lb. 8, 4 .
ARE 50151 gSer-ral-can, 'having golden locks,' name of a child ,
borne by 'a Bru -gu -ma to the king of Hor. It is killed at the rock
(brag)-Thsau-rdung-rdung. S . 7.2.
Aki Tâ y gSer-pos-gaer-ti, ‘golden hill'; it is made out of
the ogre's lungs (creation of the world ). S. 1. It is situated on the
road to Dri-mo-dgu-chod. $. 3, 4 . P . 4 .
Apa yang T 1 gSer-sbal-gser-po, 'Golden frog,' name of Kosar's
elder brother. S. 2. He is born to Gog-brang-tha-mo in Tang-lha .
La. N .
E acl Ser-ri-bu-zhung ( Ser-gyi-bu-chung), 'golden son.'
P. 5. He is also called Shel-li-bu-zhung.
qaz bSam -phel, 'increaser of thoughts,' name of one of the
jewels, brought from Jang-yd by Gyal-bu . P . 4 .

370
5 He-mis, (hem 'gnow ' in Dard ), name of the smith of Hor.
Lb. 7.
Hor-ngan, 'the bad Turkoman,' name of the king of Hor. He
is killed by Kosar in his 18th year. Gl. Kb. 3.
Hor-pa-hal-lde, (unintelligible) name of tbe king of Hor,
identical with Gur-dkar-rgyal-po. S . 5 .2, 6.1, 2. He carries off
'a Bru -gu-ma and is killed by Kesar. Lb . 6.
Hor-yul, 'land of the Turkomans.' It is famous for its horses,
and warın in winter. S. 6.1. P . 3, 4. Lb. 5. GI, Ph. 9.
IHa-skyin , 'divino ibex'; ha asks Kosar to protect the iboxes.
$. 3, 5.
3555211 IHu-rta-ngang-pa, the “light-bay divine llorse,' naine of
dBung-po-brgya-byin's horse. La. 7.
ValHa-yul, see sTang-thu -yul. S. 2.
a 59 FO @51 Hai-dhang-po-rgyab-bzhin ( = brgya-byin), Šata
kratu, Indra , the king of the gods. S. 1, 2. He was identified with
the old Tibetan gort aKyer-rdzong-anyan-po. He is seated on a gun.
8. 2, 4. Ho is connected with the colour white. $. .2. Steam rises
fronı his shoulder. He is coinpared to the rising sun ; a treasury
of jewels. P . 3. Compare d Bang-po-rgyab.zhin .
Ha-moi-lii-buzār, the ' bazár of the gods, of bell
motal,' (li, 'bell-metal,' may be a parable for ico). Name of a place
in Gro-yul. P. 3. God-ma-thsa -langs could not walk on it. It is
brokun to pieces by Kyang-rgod-dbyer-pa.
m a (Ho-krab-rgyal-po, ‘king of lHo-kral'; la robs Wang
8a g Yui-cho-ron -mo. P . 4,

371
ཨ །
W 41 A-gu, dialectical for a-khu , 'uncle,' the ordinary title of the
heroes of the Kesar Saga.
l-ne-blur-dman-mo, neo bkur-dman-ngyal-mo.
19*8 * A *4501 A-ma-akyabs-bdun, (or: skyabs-mdun), “mother seven
helps,' or 'help-mate '; name of the queen of the earth. 8 . 2,
She is connected with the colour red. S . 5.2. She has a poisonous
enake round her waist which is explained as a metaphor of the
crooked land of men. P . 3.4. Offerings presented to her. M .R , 1.
WAVOKATI A-la -cong-gol, (unintelligible), name of the eighth of the
18 agus. He has a sole of a boot instead of a head. The spelling
jong-pol is also found. S. I.
RIC951 A-long-thang, ‘ring-plain,' name of a plain on the road
to Hor. 8. 7.2. Gl. Ph. 3.
W I NR | A-sal-sal, (unintelligible), name of a pass on the road
to Hor. $. 7.2. Lb. 5.
Wy V A I A-grar-srar-gyi-la , (unintelligible), name of it pass
on the road to Hor, probably identical with Srar-gyi-la. S. 7-8 .
by ATQ5V21 Ang-gar-Itsangs-pa, (itsangs-pa moans ' lizard'), name
i
of tho second of the 18 agus. He has a lizard's head. S . 1. He is
carried off captive by the king of Hor. $. 6.3. P . 3. He is put into
a rage and suspended from the top of the castle . mDa-dpon .
gong-ma cute the suspending rope with his arrow , and dPal-moi-a -slag
receives the falling agu in her arms. He belongs to the group of
seven agus. P. 2. He is the chief Nyo-pa (bride-bidder) of the
ague.

372

373
APPENDICES
(By A . H . FRANCKE)
[1 ]
THE SPRING MYTH OF THE KESAR SAGA (1).1
TRANSLATED FROM THE Mémoires de la Société Finno-Ougrienne, No. XV.
1900, BY GEORGE R . HEATH.?
Preface.
In tho following pages one of the Kesar Sagas, which are commonly
related by the people throughout Western Tibet, is introduced to
the public, and a service thereby rendered to science, which will perhaps
be of no insignificant worth . Various travellers and Tibetan explorers
have often reported that so-called Kesar Sagas onjoy great popularity
among the Tibetan people ; but no one, as far as I know , has told 119
what the subject of these Sagas is. Even Waddell, who mentions a
mythical King Kesar several times in his epoch-making book , The
Buddhism of Tibet, can give no satisfactory information about his
person and significance.
These pages will, I hope, prove the high scientific value of the
Kabar Sagas, by showing that they are one of the chief sources from
which knowledge of the pre-Buddhistic religion of Tibet may be
drawn. $
i Reprinted from the Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, pp. 329–341.
1 All the numbers are in accordance with those of the Tibetan original. The
latter may be obtained at the Depot de la Société Finno -Ougrienne, Helsingfors,
Finland.
# There are sources of a very different character, from which Dr. Laufer is
drawing his knowledge of the Pre-Buddhistic Religion of Tibet. I have had great
pleasure in studying the following of his writinge: Klu 'abum baduspai enyingpo,
Mémoires de la Société Finno-Ougrienne, No. XI, 1898. - Uber ein tibetisches
schichts-werk der Bonpo, Toung-Pao, Serie II, Vol. II, No. 1.- Denkschriften der
baia. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien , Phil. His. Classe. Band XLVI, No, VII,
Ein Suhngedicht der Bonpo. All these publications show a very far advanced type
of the Pre-Buddhist Religion ; they show especially in the long lists of klu-s or mayas,
what a body of priests has been able to make of it. From the Kesar Myths we

374
An attempt has ofton been inade to learn something about Kesar
by setting about the translation of the long famous epics which bear
this title. But up to the present no one has produced a complote
translation . Such a work might well occupy a whole lifetime. If a
translation of the whole should in the end be made, it would be of infinite
value. Partial translations are not necessarily so, as the Buddhistic
cast, which may be clearly discorted in the opic, rendors the recognition
of the mythological features unusually difficult. From a complete
translation of the opic, a confirmation of the mythological ideas contained
in the popular Bagus inay be expected. Until we have one, we are
dopended on the sagas alone. That is not, howevor, to be rogretted at
the commencement ; for the popular sagas are short, clear, and frue from
Buddhistic influencou.
The study of the Spring Myth loads quite naturally to the desire
of becoming acquainted with the corresponding Winter Myth . I have
now succeeded in discovering this also , and I hope soon to submit it in
a Gorman translation .
It has been already mentioned by others that the sagas treated
here exist among the people in oral form . In this case , however, the
question is not one of a free narration , which runs the risk of being
altered in passing from mouth to mouth ; but rather of matter learnt by
heart, at the recitation of which (according to the respective versions)
acarcely a word is altered. A girl of about sixteen years of age, in whoso
family the stories of Konar are held in high esteem , related the following
sagas slowly, so that the master of the Mission School she attended was
enabled , under my supervision, to take them down word for word .
This First Manuscript is the foundation of the accompanying Tibetan
text almost throughout. In the comparison and confirmation of the
text, as well as in the addition of some now features, a Second
Manuscript has also been of great service. This was prepared for me
by another Ladakhi who is able to write , and who went to the Bedas
(a caste of musicians and popular entortainers), and wrote down literally
what they relatod . The two manuscripts daviate a little from one
TDAY lear , on the other hand , what this religion has been to the ordinary man ,
It would certainly not be right to consider the Kesar Sagas as inere fairy-tales,
told for the amusement of the people. This is shown most plainly by a comparison
with the Ladakhi Wedding Ritual and the popular Bonpa Hymnal (gling glu),
which run on the same lines as the Kegar Saga9 and are both of a distinctly religious
cast.

375
another both in the form of the narrative and in the wording of the songs,
but agree perfectly in everything essential.
Something remains to be said on the poetical form of the songs,
which are interspersed in the narrative. We find in them different
kinds of rhythm as well as of rhyme. The rhythms are almost
always formed of trocheos, which corresponds to the monosyllabic
character of the language. Dactyls, however, algo occur, sapecially
when a suffix is added to & dissyllabic compound. The sentence
rhyme peculiar to Tibet is the one which occurs in almost all the
songs (i.e., two or three sentences are formed in exactly the same manner,
but different words are placed in the corresponding positions). I have
tried in the translation to imitate the sentence-rhyme as far as possible.
With regard to the rhythms I have allowed myself greater freedom . 1
Finally, it should be pointed out that the language of the Tibetan
text is not the classical but the Ladakhi dialect.
An Abridged Episode from the Kesar Saga. 2
Translation ,
1.
The first Tale is the Tale of the Agus (heroes).
1. In the land of gLing there were once the wild Agus dPalle
and Khromo and dGani. Because there was no king in the land of
gLing, deep sorrow came over Agu dPalle . Aga Khromo was a bad
man ; he rejoiced at the unhappiness of the land. One day the wild
Agus went to tend goats. 2. Then dBangpo -rgyab -bzhin also
came from the upper kingdom of the gods to te id goats. All at onca
the black devil-bird appeared , and wanted to carry off the goats. 3.
dBangpo-rgyab-bzhin changed himself into tho white god -bird , and
both fought. 4. The thought occurred to all the Agus:- The black
bird seems to be the devil-bird.' 5. Then Agu dPalle seized the
sling, and sang this song:
6. Oh Sling, thou many-coloured sling,
7. (My) mother spun thee in her time,
8 . (My) mother plaited thee in her time,
This sontence-rhyme is the same type of parallelism es has become known
from Chineye popular poetry.
* The division into nine parts is my own. (A . H . Francke.)

376
9. I carried it when I was a boy,
10. Oh come, oh come thou oblong stone,
11. Hit sure, be there no escape !
12. So singing, he slung (the stone), and hit the black devil-bird
on the wing (or shoulder-blade), so that he died. 13. At this d Bangpo
rgyab -bzhin rejoiced greatly, and in order to show love to the Agus,
be sang:
14 . Men of gLing, kindly are ye coine,
15. Palle, dGani, kindly are ye como,
16 . A cow and a calf will I give you a hundredfold ,
17. Foal and horse will I give you a hundredfold ,
18. A laden pack-sheep will I give you a hundredfold ,
19. Goat and kid will I give you a hundredfold ,
20. A saddled horse will I give you a hundredfold ,
21. A yak with the nose-ring will I give you a hundredfold !
22 . When he had sung this song, the Agus said : All that is not
DECOAbary. ' 23. To Agu dPalle this thought occurred :- The
King of Heaven dBangpo -rgyab -bzhin has three sons; it would
be good if he sent one son to the land of gLing as King. Therefore
he asked : - 24 . ' O give a child as chief to the chiefless land. When
dBangpo-rgyab-bzhin heard that, he went back quickly to the upper
kingdom of the gods. .
II.
The second Tale is the Tale of dBangpo -rgyab -bzhin 's
Three Sons.
1. The king of the gods, dBangpo- rgyab -bzhin , had three
sons, Donldan , Donyod and Dongrub . Because their father loved
them very much , he did not like to send even one to the land of gLing.
2. When therefore he came back to the upper kingdom of the gods,
he ate nothing and sut there in angor. 3. Then his son Donidan
brought his tea and his food , but the father ate nothing. Donldan
said :--
'Father !
4. Has the wolf got at the sheep !
5. Has the crow got at the breakfast (or midday meal) ?
6. Was the sling lost at the hunt ?'
1 Lit. : Carrying was at the time when I was a boy.

377
The father said :--
7. " The wolf has not got at the sheep,
8. The crow has not got at the breakfast,
9. The sling was not lost at the hunt.
10. But thou, my son, wilt thou go as chief to the chiefloss land of
gLing ? If thou goest, I will take the tea and the food !' 11. The son
said : ' I shall not go !
12. If the dog is angry, the soup is left (uneaten ),
13. If the king is full of wrath, the roast in left (uneaten )!'
14 . Then came the son Donyod and said : 15. Father, eat the
food and drink the tea !' 16. The father said :- ' Thou, my son , wilt
thou go as chief to the chiefless land of gLing ?' 17. The son said :
* I shall not go!
18. If the dog is angry, the soup is left (uneaten ),
19. If the king is full of wrath, the roast is left (uneaten )!'
20. Then came Dongrub , the smallest of all, and askod :- -
Father!
21. Has the wolf got at the sheep ?
22. Has the crow got at the breakfast ?
23. Was the sling lost at the hunt?'
The father said :
24. The wolf has not got at the sheep,
25. The crow has not got at the breakfast,
26. The sling was not lost at the hunt !
27. My son, wilt thou go as chief to the chiefless land of
gLing !
28. The soul said : " If I do not listen to the word of father and
mother, to whose word shall I listen ? I shall go !' 29. Then the
father took the tea and the food . Again great sadness came over the
father, and he sang :--
30. (My) son Donldan , he is the heart of my thinking;
31. I am not able to tear out one's heart and to give it to another
32 . (My) son Donyod , he is the tongue of my speaking.
33. It is not right to tear out one's tongue and to give it to
another!
34. (My) son Dongrub, he is the eye of my seuing;
35. It is not right to tear out one's eye and to give it to another ! '

378
36. Then spake the father:-- Before Dongrub goes to the land of
gLing, all you (my) sons must have a race on horseback one day in the
morning, 37, at midday play at dice, 38, and in the evening shoot
arrows.' 39. So they all had a horse -race in the morning, and the
youngest son Dongrub won it. 40. At midday they played at dice,
and the youngest son Dongrub won . 41. In the evening they shot
arrows, and the youngest son Dongrub won. 42. Then came the timo
when the son Dongrub was to go to the land of gLing.
III.
The third Tale is the Tale of Dongrub , who is fitted out
for the land of gLing.
1. Before the son Dongruh went to the land of men, the high
mother gave him a lesson , the high father gave him a lesson. Both said
thus - Thou needest
2. A horse that always knows the way back,
3. A horse that knows how to fly high ,
4. A knife to stab the wicked people,
5 . A knife to stab Buddha,
6. An arrow that always know , the way back !'.
7. Then said the mother :- ' 0 yes, it is hard for Dongrub to go
to the land of men !
8. Kyangbyung -dbyerpa is certainly
9. A horse that always knows the way back,
10. A horse that knows how to fly high .
11. The knife “ Three-fingers-long " is 
certainly
12. A knife to stab the wicked people,
13. A knife to stab Buddha.
14. The blue Srinyzhu is 
certainly
18. A bow whose arrow flies back.' This is the lesson of the high
mother:
16 . rKyangbyung-dbyerpa, the high horse ,
17. And moreover Srinyzhu, the blue bow .
18. Thou wilt find at the house of Uncle brTandzin the Red .
19. Teetse-ngandmar 
is on the pass;
20. Upon hor, O Dongrub, thou wilt spring woll
21. And of that, O Dongrub, thon wilt die.'

379
22. So then the son went to fetch the horse , the knife, and the
bow, and arrived before the house of brTandzin the Red. 23. There
he saw the horse, whose four legs were fastened with chains. When
the horse heard a man coming he sprang up . 24. Dongrub spako:
Uncle, all bail! Give me the horse rKyangbyung-dbyerpa and the
blue bow Srinyzhu! I, the son Dongrub, am going to the land of men ,
I have come here to greet my uncle !' 25. The uncle said : — ' The
horse rKyangbyung-dbyerpa is here; lead him away! the blue bow
Srinyzhu is not here , but in Agu Za 's land !' 26 . When he heard
that, he went to Agu Za's house, leading the horse. 27. In the middle
of the way was a white and a black pool. 28 . As he was washing his
bands in the black pool, another hand came out of the water, seized
Dongrub's hand and held it fast. 29. Then said Dongrub : Who is
it that seizas my hand ?' 30. Out of the water a voice answered :
•Why art thou washing thy hands in our water ?' 31. When he heard
that, Dongrub spake : Please, please let my hand go ! I am in haste.
I am going in order to become the chief of the chiefloss gLing-Land and
Want to fetch the blue bow Srinyzhu from Agu Za ' 32. Then it was
said out of the water :- ' As soon as thou cryest, saying, " Agu Za " ,
(the giant) will swallow thee. Therefore I tell thee this: In Agu Za's
body is the knife and the bow . So take the knife in the right hand and
his heart in the left. Then if thou stab his heart, he will cry, " Come
out!" ' 33. Then (he, she, it ?) let Dongrub's hand go, and vanished in
the water.
34. When Dongrub arrived at Agu Za's house , the Agu put his
hand out at the window , seized Dongrub and ste him up. 35. So
Dongrub sat in the body of the Agu ), and seized the knife with the
right hand. In the left he took the heart, and stabbed . 36 . Then
Agu Za criod :- -'Who is in my body ? Come out!' 37. Dongrub
said :. -'My good Agu, am I not the son of the king of heaven ,
Gyabbzhin ? When I am going as chief to the chieflees land of gLing
and want to greet Agu and ask him for the blue bow Srinyzhu , the
Agu seizes me and swallows me,' 38. Then spake the Agu : 0
my heart, all hail! I feel ill! Come out!' Dongrub answered : 39.
My good Agu, wilt thou listen to my word ? If thou listen to it, I will
give thee sun and moon to eat for a year. Is that enough ?' 40. The
Agu said : ' It is enough, O my eye !' 41. Dongrub spake : Then I
will come out through the Agu 's pineal gland, and bring the whole
brain out on to the head !' 42. The Agu requested : - ' O my eye,

380
please come out by the way thou wentest in !' 43. Then I will come
out at the Agu's sole.' 44. ' O my eye, rather than that come out by
the way thou wontest in !' 45 . Then Dongrub came out at the pit
of the neck , and had the bow and the knife in his hand . He gave sun
aud moon to the Agu to eat for a year.
46. While he was going to the chiefless land of gLing, he arrived
at the foot of a mountain , and saw the goat Tsetse-ngangdmar lying
thoro. He sprang on to it. 47. Thio goat was frightened, and carried
him on to the summit of three mountains. There it threw him down,
and Dongrub died.
IV .
The fourth Tale is the Tale of Dongrub's birth on the earth .
1. When Dongrub had died , he changed himself into hail,
and came down to the land of gLing. 2. There he was born to
Gogzalhamo. 3. Although he was the high king of the land of gLing, he
was born in lowly form . . His mouth was as large as a well, and (his )
eyes black and ugly . 5. On the pillow of (his) mother there was some
bad moal. The child suddenly got up, (and) went and ate some of the
meal. 6 . The mother said : He does not give himself time to grow ,
but oats meal (already)!' She clothed it with a piece of ass's sackcloth,
tied a goat's hair string around it, and put a stone upon it . 7. For
the mother was itshamed of the child 's lowly form . 8. At the same
time the spouse bKur dmanmo from the kingdom of the gods changed
herself into the mother dkar thigmo and went to prepare some soup
for Gogzalhamo. 9. Mother dkar thigmo said : Well, Gogzalhamo,
what has been born to you ?' Gogzalhamo spake:- 10 . 'Of all that
wbich was or was not born to me there is nothing left . It was born
with ugly black eyes and a mouth like a well, and it ate meal without
giving itself time to grow . I have clothed it with a piece of ass's sack
cloth , and put a stone on it. There it is, under the stone!' Mother
dkar thigmo took the child from under the stone, and the child said :
12. ' Kinder art thou than water, O Ladly dKar thigmo, now
listen !
Kinder than even (my) mother, O Lady dkar thigino, now
listen !
14. After the inanner of men , a bowl should be filled with butter;

381
15. Gogzalhamo, however, threw to me buckwheat.
16 . After the manner of men , the child should be put in
the child-neck ;
17. Gogzalhamo, however, put sackcloth around me.
18. A son is born to the mother! says he,
19. A son is born to Gogza ! says he,
20 . And he blows white bands up to the sky.
2). A son is born to the mother! says he,
22. A son is born to Gogza ! says he,
23. And he blows red bands across the earth.
24, A son is born to the mother! says he,
25. A son is born to Gogza! says ho,
26. And he blows blue bands down to the waters.'
The fifth Tale is the Tale of Khromo, who sought to
harm Kesar, the King of the Gods.
l. While this was going on , Agu Khromo heard that Kesar, the
king of the gods, had been born to Gogzalhamo. 2. Therefore he
said to saven priests from the east:- In that cottage there is a child .
If you can kill the child , I will give you half of (my) castle and land.'
3. Then the priests from the east disguised themselves as beggars and
went to Gogzalhamo's cottage. 4. Gogzalhamo thought = ' These seven
men are beggars ; ' filled a golden and a silver plate for them , and brought
it out. 5. The seven spiritual beggars said :- 'We need neither a golden
nor a silver plate . Give us the child ! We want to teach it religion.'
Then Gogzalhamo gave them the child . 6 . Then came Mother dKar
tbigmo, and cried :-- Gogzalhamo, to whom have you given the child
away ?' 7. Gogzalhamo answered:--- Seven priests, who said , “ We
want to teach it religion " , have carried it off.' 8. Thọn spake Mother
dKar thigmo:— How could you give the child away!' and Gogzalhamo
ran to get back the child , till she inot the seven beggars. 9. The
beggars had bound the child's arms and legs with chains, had laid fire
on his heart, and were pouring boiling water into his mouth. 10. When
1 In Ladakh, it is a sack filled with dry horse-dung to keep the child warm .
In this way baby linen , etc. is apared. (Francke's note.)

382
the mother saw that, she came before the seven beggars, and cried :
' Give me my child !' The child said :
11. ' Fourfold I lie hore not bound :
12. In four directions four enemies will fall.
13. On my breast I feel no flame:
14. It is a sign of flaming happiness.
15. Hot water I do not foel on my hend:
16. It is a sign of tea, beer (and) milk to come.'
17. As he sung this , the child said :-- Hung one, hung two!' broke
the chains and ran to his mother. Then Gogzalhamo carried the child
home. 18 . But the men von priests from the east changed themselves
into beetles and clovoured the ashes of the fire.
19. So when Agil Khromo knew that the child was not yet
conquered , he said : - [ will go myself; ' (and ) came and asked
Gogzalhamo:- ' Where is the child ? Has he grown big ?' 20. The
child said : - My yood Agu, I am here!' Wheroupon Khromo took the
child out of the best and carried liim off. 21. There was a rock of
poison thoro. Upon it he wanted to throw the child . But although
Agu Khromo was able to whirl lini round, he could not throw hiin on to
the rock. 22. The child said :- 'Swing me round, good Agu, do! Throw
me off, do !' 23. Tho Agu said :-- læm tiled , I cannot any longer!'
21. Whereupon the child cried :--- Now the Agu's time for whirling
(ne) round is past ; now it is my tum !' (and ) saying this, he threw the
Agu on to the poisonous rock. 25. As the rock was of fiery poison ,.010
siile of Khromo's body got burnt.
26. One day Agu dPalle, Agu dGani and Agu Khromo went
hunting together, and killed it wild yak. To the place wliere they killed
it the child came also . 27. The Agus said : - Go, carry a whole leg
at once to thy mother!' The child bit his teeth into a tendon of the
leg, carried it off, gave it to his mother, and came back . 28. Then the
Agus said :- Taku all the intestines and the inwards also to (thy) mother!'
and sent him way. The child wrapped it all up in his hip-cloth , bit with
(huis ) teeth into the upper end of tlie intestines, and carried it home to
(his ) mother. Then he returned. 29. Agu Khromo became angry, threw
the woodon poker (at him ), and hit the child on the role at the back of
the neck , so that he fainted and fell to the ground. 30 . Then saich
Agu d Palle to Khrono: He is also a member of our father's brothers.
They will avengo laim on thee!' Then Agu Khroruo was frightened , and
spake to the child :- 31, ' Lister, Street-boy; got up, please! I will

383
give thee the chief ford of a hundred fordk.' 32. The child isked :
Wilt thou give it (to. me), my good Ayu ? ud yot up. 33. When the
Street-child had received the chief ford f a hundred fords, it allowod
no one to cross it. 34 , One day as Ayu Khromo was coming through
the water at that chief ford , the Street-child cried :- 36 . Who is
coming through the water tbero and threw a stone at Khromo. 36.
Agu Khromo said :-- Ow, it is I!' and the child cried sinilingly:- Why
didst thou not say that before, my good Agu ?' 37. The Street-boy
became very powerful. If no part of the mourning-feast was yiven to
him , he let no funeral procession pass ; and if no part of the marriage .
ferest was given to him , he lot no marriage procession cross. All that he
carried away, and gave it to Gogzalhamo.
VI.
The sixth Tale is the Tale of the Maiden 'aBruguma, whom
the Street-child met.
1. Now at that time tbe Street-child went to the upper Groma-field
to gather groma 1 roots, and met there the maiden 'aBruguma and
ber handmaid Darlhagochodma. 2. The Street-child found as muy
roots as a horso's head or yak’s head is great, ind made a loaf for himself
out of them . 3. Maiden 'a Bruguma and Iarlhagochodma found only
one dry root each . 4. As they found no more , the handmaid said to the
Street-child :-- Give our Lady 'a Bruguma il piece of root-bread too !'
5. The Strout-child answered :- ' No, little sister, 1 must nourish my
mother! 6. Then he ate some of the root-bread before the two girls,
and apako, 'Sindiremalng !' While be said that, the loaf ytrw whole
gain , and he began to eat once more. 7. Then spake ho :- Now
Maiden a Bruguma shall also eat some. But as much as she eats must
be brought back again . There, eat some!' 8. Maiden 'a Brugula
ate half of the loaf and said , ' Sindirrmalag ! But ilthough she stil
that, nothing came back . The mark of the teeth romainet. 9. Then
spake the Street-child :- ( toll (laughter of Father br l'anpa , O
thou daughter of Mother Ghorol! Give me back my breadl! If I see
a doy, the lov shall bell of it : if I see a pats, the man sluall' hear out it!
10. When Maiden a Bruguma heard that, she thought he was illgry,
and spake to the Street-buy - To-Morrow we are yoing to have a feast,
1 Groma is a species of prioritilla .

384
and thou shalt take part in it ! II. The Street-child asked : Shall
I take part, little sister ?' and 'a Bruguma said : Yes thou shalt be
there .' 12. On the next day the Street-child went earlier than all
(the rest) to 'a Bruguma's house, and hid himself behind the upper
door-beam . 13. So when all the people had come together to the
feast, 'a Bruguma said :- Are we all here ? Shut the door before the
Street-child comes!' 14. Then the Street-child called out froin
the beam :-- I have already arrived , little sister !' 15. a Bruguina
spake :----- And I had just said that he had not come yet!' 16 . He
called out laughing:-- So I just heard (my) little sister sy! If I see a
dog, the dog shall hear of it; if I see a man, the man shall hear of
it!' 17. Then spake 'a Bruguma :- - Listen , Street-child , to-morrow
we are going to give a friendly beer-banquet. All the Agus are going
to come to it. Wilt thou also be there ?' 18 . He spake: Little
sister, wilt thou listen to my word ?' The maiden said :- I will listen to
it.' 19. He spake:- Thon thou must say this to Agu d Pallo and the
others :
20. Who takes a drink of the beer of life, let him have children
beyond measure !
21. Who takes a drink of the beer of blessing, let his life be like
that of the gods !
22. Drink without touching the ten finger-tips,
23. And without wetting the silk of the tongue, 1
24. Nor may'st thou knock the pearls of the teeth ; 2
25. Drink with the soul,
26. Yea, drink with the heart!'
27. So the next morning, when all the Agus had come together,
'a Bruguma brought the beer of friendship, came before Agu dGani,
and said :
28. Hail, on (thy) golden throne, O Agu Gani, now listen !
29. Soe this vossol, filled with thoughts and nine-fold buttored . 3
1 Literally : And without tasting with the silken knots of the tongue.
? Literally : Not knocking the teeth like milk , like a robary, like pearls.
* A small pica of butter (called yar) which is smeared round the edge of a
veggel with the thumb to honour a guest. Dr. Laufer asks for an analysis
of this sentence. The Tibetan toxt is properly bungpa bsampas don sgrubla ma's
brgyabo dgu brgyubs shw yod. This means literally : 'A vessel furnished with
thoughts according to the meaning (don ), smeared by men, smeared nicefold , such
it ia '; brgyals is gaid instead of yar brgyals, it is sineared with butter.

385
30. Who takes a drink of the boer of life, let him be blessed
with many children !
31. Who takes a drink of the beer of blessing, let his life be
like that of the gods!
32. Drink without touching the ten finger-tipe,
33. And without wetting the silk of the tongue,
34. Nor may'st thou knock the pearls of the teeth ;
35. Drink with the soul,
36. Yea, drink with the heart!'
Then spake Agu dGani:
37. “Not wetting the tongue,
38. Not filling the stomach ,
39. Not touching the hands,
40. How then shall I drink it ? Away with the bowl!'
41. Because he spoke so , the girl carried the vessel to Agu d Palle :
42. ' Hail on (thy) throne of shell, 0 Agu dPalle, now listen !
43. See this vessel, filled with thoughts and nine-fold buttered !
44 . Who takes a drink of the beer of life, let him be blessed
with many children !
~ 45. Who takes a drink of the beer of blessing, may ho live as long
as the gods!
46. Drink without touching the ten finger-tips,
47. And without wetting the silk of the tongue,
48. Nor may'st thou knock the pearls of the teeth ;
49. Drink with the soul,
50. Yea, drink with the heart!
Then spako Agu dPalle:
51. ‘Not wetting the tongue,
52. Not filling the stomach,
53. Not touching the hards,
54: How then shall I drink it ? Away with the bowl!'
55. Then 'a Bruguma said to the Agus :- Shall I ask the Street.
child also ? ' 56. The Agus spake :- 'He is also a member of our father's
brothers' (clan ). Auk him also, do !' 57. And 'a Bruguma addressed
hmma:- ' Yes, listen , Street-child, give me thy bowl!' 58. The Street
child spake:- Yes, certainly, little sister, just as thou hast said to the
Agua, speak also to !' So 'a Bruguma sang:

386
59. Thou on (thy) wooden chair, thou Street-boy there, now
listen :
60. Soe this vessel, filled with thoughts and nine-fold butteredt
81. Who takes a drink of the boor of life, let him be blessed with
many children.
62. Who takes a drink of the beer of blessing, may he live as
long as the gods !
63 . Drink without touching the ton finger-tips,
64. And without wetting the silk of the tongue,
85. Nor may'st thou knock the pearls of the teeth 1
66. Drink with the soul,
67. Yea, drink with the heart !'
68. Thereupon the Street-child said :-- Little sister, wait a little !'
Then he threw the vessel towards the sky with his stick studded with
dog's teeth , and drank the beer out of the sky. 69. While he drank it,
he said : ' I feel how the Lord of Heaven, rGyabbzhin , is giving me a
drink of the beer of friendship !' Then all the Street-folk shouted :
* Now our Street-boy has got Lady 'a Bruguma as bride! Hurrah for
Love 1 !!
VII.
The seventh Tale is the Tale of 'aBruguma, who
becomes Kesar 's bride.
1. The Sovereign of Heaven had heard the shouting of the Street
'cbild , and he came with the whole retinue of heaven and the retinue of
the water-spirits, and held a horse-race with all the Agus. 2. The
handmaid Darlhagochodma took Lady 'aBrugama to the race-course,
and put her on a rock. 3. The handmaid said :- To-day listen to my
ward : Upon whose horse thou canst jump at the race , his bride thou
wilt be!
4. Listen to -day to the word of the servant,
5. Listen to Darlhagochodma's word !
6. To-day will the skin be pulled over thy ears ; 2
7. Father brTanpa's daughter will receive blows!'
1 Yoshaho shouted at weddings.
1 Dr. Laufer asks for an analysis of this sentence. The Tibetan har : rkyat
rion wi bumola royal shue blang yin . The literal translation is : ' To the girl who
is like & wet leather-bag, will be given a peeling off of the skin .' In my translation
I made use of the correeponding German idiom .

387
8. Then the king of Heaven , rGyabbzhin , came riding along,
and 'aBruguma spake :
9. ' I know neither the man that is riding,
10. Nor even the swift horse underneath.'
Thereupon the handmaid said :
11. " If thou knowest not the man that is riding,
12. Know , that is the King of Heaven ;
13. And the swift steed underneath
14. Is the god 's borse, called the Bay.
16 . Man and horse touch not, let them go ! If thou jumpest now ,
then thou committest a great sin against the gods!'
So 'a Bruguma did not jump.
16. Then the Earth -Mother, skyabsbdun came riding along.
Lady 'a Bruguma spake :--
17. ' I know neither the man that is riding,
18. Nor even the swift horse underneath .'
The handmaid said :
19. “ If thou knoweat not yet the man that is riding,
20. See, it is eKyabsbdun, the Earth-Mother ;
21. And the swift horse underneath ,
22. That is the red earth-horse .
23. Rider and horso touch not, let them go ! If thou jumpest
now , then thou committest a great sin against the earth !'
So 'a Bruguma did not jump.
24. Then Cogpo, the King of the water -spirite, came riding
Along, and 'aBruguma spake :
25. ' I know neither the man that is riding,
· 26. Nor even the swift horse underneath.'
The servant said :
27. ' If thou knowest not yet the man that is riding,
28 . See, it is 1Cogpo, the Water-king ;
29. And the swift steed underneath ,
30. That is the blue water-horse.
31. Rider and horse touch not, let them go ! If thou jumpest
now , thou committest a great sin against the water-spirits !'
So 'a Bruguma did not jump.

388
32 . Then all the Agus of the land of gling came riding past,
and 'a Bruguma did not jump. 33. Last of all the Street-child
came riding along. He had put off his humble form . He had a reddish .
violet crown, 1 and (his) horse e short, reddish-violet mane. On the
man's right shoulder the sun was rising, (and) on left the moon .
a Bruguma spake :
34. " I know noither the man that is riding,
35 . Nor even the swift horse underneath.'
Then said Darlhagochodma :
36. If thou knowest not yet the man that is riding,
37. See , it is Kesar, of gLing the King :
38. And the swift steed underneath,
39. It is the noble rKyangbyung dbyerpa .
40 . Now if everything is well carried out, then all people will
call me Gochodma (that is: She that fulfils). If it is not carried out
well, then I shall call myself Gomichod (that is: Unfulfilled ). Man
and borse lot not pass; seize them .' 41. So when Kosar came riding on ,
the Maiden 'a Bruguma suddenly jumped on to the horse . 42. As the
maiden jumped , Kesar put on his humble form again , caused a strong
sinell of lice, and changed the house into a female Dzo with broken horns,
43. Then all the street-folk shouted :— Hurrah for love! Lady 'a Bruguma
is our Street-boy's bride!' Then 'aBruguma made the Street-child her
bridegroom , and took him home.
VIII.
The eighth Tale is the Tale of Kesar, who teases 'aBruguma.
1. One day 'a Bruguma's mother spread the carpet out the wrong
way round, so that it had the front edge towards the wall. 2. The
Street-boy said :- Where the front edge of the carpet is, there the face
of the guest must also he,' and sat down with his face turned to the
wall. 3. Then spake Father brTanpa to a Bruguma : The boy is
nine times too clover; he will run away yet.' 4. Therefore the maiden
covered the Street-boy with in pot, turning it upside down.2 5. Non
— - - - - - - - - -
i Tuft of hair (according to Dr. Laufer and Jäschke's Dictionary).
2 Dr. Laufer's translation , 'she put him in a pot with his face indieciicutli',
is impossible ; he is the opening of the pat.
5B

389
although the handmaid and the maiden herself sat before it keeping
watch, the Street-child escaped without letting either hear anything. 6 .
Before the door he tore bis upper garment in pieces near the place where
the dogs were kept, killod a goat and poured its blood out. The entrails
of the goat he wrapped round the teeth of the dogs. Then he fled into
the innermost part of the valley. 7. When Father brTanpa . saw that
(before the door), he said to 'a Bruguma My daughter, go and look
for him ! The dogs have surely not eaten him l' Then 'a Bruguma went
to look for him all around on a hundred , (yea ) a thousand 
mountains,
and did not find him . 8. The maiden 's dress tore right up to the
collar. (Hor) shoes tore from the sole right up to the top. 9. As she
did not find him yet, she went to Agu dPalle and Agu dGani, and
spake: -
10. "Thou on (thy) golden throne, Agu Gani, now listen !
11. Early in the morning I began to climb, and came on to the
golden hill;
12. In the evening I descended , and came to the copper-field .
13. Did he then come for copper ? I would now like to ask the
Agu !'
Agu dGani spake :
14 . 'If the dogs have devoured the Street-child ,
15. Then will the skin be pulled over thy ears,
16. Then indeed will blows be laid on brTanpa 's daughter!'
So 'a Bruguma went to Agu dPalle, and spake :
17. " Thou on (thy) throne of shell there. Agu d Palle, then listen !
18. In the morning I began to climb, and came on to the silver
hill;
19. In the evening I descended , and came to the lead-fields.
20). Did he then come for lead ? I would like to ask the Agu .'
Agu d Palle said :
21. " If the dogs have devoured the Strept-child.
22. Then will the skin be pulled over thy ears,
23. Then indeed will blows be laid on brTanpa 's daughter!'
24. Then spake 'a Bruguma : -- Everybody says that!' and went
to look for him again . Then she took a stone which had a hole in it),
boked through (it), (to see) whether she could see him , and caught

390
sight of him in the innermost corner of the valley. 25. And he had
the reddish-violet crown on, and (his) horse (had) the reddish-violet
mano; he had put off his humble form , and was dancing around merrily .
26. Then the maiden ran as fast as ever she could , and reached place
where he was. 27. He said : --' Wel, girl, from where hast thou come ?
und gave her, in a piece of a broken cup, a loathsome lump of bad meal,
which he had kneaded together. 28. He spake :- If thou eatest this,
I will run off again !' 'a Bruguma ate it and said :-- Then go, good
King, do!' He spake :- 29. 'And thou, the rich daughter of a rich
man, hast eaten up the whole bad dough. 30. If I meet a dog, the
dog shall hear of it. 31. If I moet a man, the man shall hear of it!'
32. Then they both went back to Mother Gogzalhamo.
33. One day as the Street-boy was preparing a feast, he slaughtored
many sheep and goats. 34. One skinned animal he hid in 'a Bruguma's
cloak, and said :- 35. 'One skinned animal is missing! Who is the
thief? Mothor, thou hast surely not stolen it ?' 36 . The mother
answered :— Would I thon take anything besides what thou hast given
ine ?' 37. He spake :- Handmaid , thou hast surely not stolen it ?'
38. The handmaid answered :- 'Would I then take anything besides
what the king has given me ?' 39. Then he spake to 'a Bruguma:--
'And thou wilt surely steal nothing, thou rich child of a rich man ? Stand
up now , and shake (yourself)!' 40. 'a Bruguma said : Would I then
take anything besides what the king has given me ?' All at once she
stood up, and as she shook (herself), it dropped out of her cloak. 41.
The Street-child said: 'And thou has stolen it, thou rich child of a rich
man ! I will not go with thee!' In this way lie teased her,
IX .
The ninth Tale is the Tale of the Wedding.
Gogzalhamo sproad out three carpets, one blue, one
1. Mother 
red and one whito. Then she hung up three ribbons, one whito, one
red and one blue. 2. She spake to 'a Bruguma : 'Shut (thy) eyes tight,
take one out of all these ribbons, and go and sit down on one of the
carpets! I shall wait for a dream .' 3. So 'a Bruguma shut (her) eyes
tight, took a ribbon and went on to a carpet. 4. She took a blue ribbon,
is Kesar,
and came on to the blue carpet. 5 (Her) mother said : Now 
the King of the gods, thy portion . Later on the white tents of Yarkand
will be thy portion !' This sho spake prophosying. 6. In the same

391
moment the Street-child had put on (bis) lowly form again . 7.
'a Bruguma spake to (her ) mother: - 'Give me back the man who was
just here !' 8. (Her) mother said I will go (and look for him )
with thee.' 9. The Street-child had been brought to the glorious
castle, and been stripped of (his humble body by (his) father's brothers.
10. Maiden 'a Bruguma arrived beforo the castle and saw the horse
rKyangbyung dbyerpa. 11. The horse spake: Lady 'a Brugu,
entor?' 'a Bruguma said :- I have lost my former husband .' 12. Then
the horse took the maidon up with his teeth and threw her into the
glorious castle. 13. Then King Kesar, got a golden throne, and
'a Bruguma a throne of turquoise . 14 . Now they were happy, and
became stout. Three nights long they celebrated their wedding, and
three days long they gave foasts. The tale and the story is at an end.

THE SPRING MYTH OF THE KESAR SAGA (II.) 1
(Ry Rev. A . H . FRANCKE)
Additions to the Saga from other Versions.
Preliminary Note ,
The Kesar Saga is told differently in different villages. To arrive
at a final solution of the question , as to whether the oral tales (kha
sgrungs) or the Kesar Epic (dPe sgrungs) are the original source with
regard to Ladakh , it will be necessary to arrange something like a Kesar
survey of Ladakh, i.e., in every village the following material will
have to be collected :- (1) the version of the Kesar Saga , (2) the gLing
glu (Hymnal of the Kesar Saga ), (3 ) the marriage ritual of the village.
All this material will have to be compared with the Kesar Epic.
List of Additions.
The following list of additions is not, in the least, claimed as a full one.
1. At the place where the Agus ask for a king, the following request
is also added : 'Send us nine kinds of corn -seed, and also horses, oxen
and many four-footed animals.'
2. First detailed version of the story of the birth :- Gogzalhamo
sat spinning in her room while the hail was falling. As she was hungry
just then, she ate some hail-stones, and soon after conceived . When
the hail came, all the horses fled : the mare Thsaldang was the last.
All the dogs also fled , the she-dog dKarmo was the last ; all the sheep
fled, and the ewe Dromo was the last; all the goats fled, 'Ayld Tsetse
ngangdmar was the last. Then came Agu dPalle and brought food
to the animals that were with child . Thereupon the mare 
Thsaldang
gave birth to the foal rKyang-byung -dbyerpa , the she-dog d Karmo
to the puppy Drumbu -brang -dkar, the ewe Dromo to the lamb
m Thsalmig, the she-goat Tsotso-ngangdmar to the kid Tsetse
ngangdmar.
1 Reprinted from the Indian Antiguary, Vol. XXXI, 1902, pp . 32 -40.

393
3. Second version of the story of the birth :- Mother Gogzalhamo
heard within her a voice, which said : ' I must be born in the lofty sky;
please go to the lofty sky! So she went, and gave birth to (the) sun and
moon. Then it said : 'Sun and moon I am not ; I must be born on the
lofty mountain ; please go on to the lofty mountain !' So she went,
and gave birth to the white ice-lion . Then it said : “ The white ice-lion
I am not; I must be born on the lofty rook ; please) go on to the lofty
rock .' So she went, and gave birth to the wild bird-king. In this way
the narrative progresses, and Gogzalhamo gives birth to the horse
rKyangbyung-khadkar in the midst of the steppe ; in the midst of the
sea to the little fish Gold -eye ; in the midst of the meadow to the yak
'aBrong byung rogpo; in the midst of the forest to the rat Kraphusse ;
in the midst of the field to the little bare bird ; also, in Stanglha to a
golden frog; in Barbtsan to a white frog ; and in Yogklu to a blue frog .
After all that to her child also.
4. Third version of the story of the birth : Over the whole earth
it wag dark ; but at Gogzalhamo's house appeared a bright light.
The child teased the mother in the same way as Dongrub did the giant
in III. 34-45. Finally, it camo out between the ribs, without causing
the mother any pain . The child was very beautiful, and had golden
hair and wings; yet the mother could see nothing of its beauty. At its
birth the fire blazed up of itself; grand dishes were couked in the oven ;
sweet fragrance filled the room , and jewels came raining in . The child
grow in a day as much as others in a month .
5 . To V . There came eighteen Andhe Bandhe, who put the child
in a kettle, in order to boil it. The unintended effect was that the
child came out inuch stronger and more hardened than it had been
before.
6 . The young folk of gLing have gone hunting, and have killed
nothing. Thereupon the Stroet-child goes out with the sling, and drives
a whole herd of game into the cattle-pen , where he kills the artima!
with (his ) knife, and cuts off their heads. Now appear the Lamas from
the monastery, and reproach him for killing animals. Kesar asks if.
they never ato moat. They say: 'Only (that) of animals which have
died a natural death .' He says, " Diridir ”, and snaps his fingers.
All the animals come to life, and look for their heads. In doing so ,
they take the wrong heads in their hurry, so that large animals get
small heads, and vice versa . Then the whole herd runs away, and

394
the Street-boy says to the Lamas: 'Be sure not to forget to fetch the
animals and out thom when they have died.'
7. The Agus institute an archery-contest. The one who hits in
the middle shall be king. The Street-boy comes, and hits a tiny mark
at an enormous distance ; but vanishes again completely immediately
after.
8. According to another version , it is Agu Khromo, and in one
case the husband of Gogzalhamo, who is said to have killed the devil.
bird ; but this gives no logical coherence .
9. (To III.) Advice for the journey to the earth :
If Bya khyung dkrung nyima troubles thee,
Call Byamo dkarmo to thy belp :
If 'aDre lha btsan bog troubles thee,
Call Dzemo 'aBamza 'aBum skyld to thy help .
10. a 'Bruguma, a donkey's mother. This story is told after
Spring Myth No. VI. 16 . All the guests, being drunk, had gone to
sloep. Kosar silently left the room and went to a neighbour's sho-ass,
that was with child . He caused her to give birth to a young ass at once
by giving her very cold water to drink . The foal he carries to the
banqueting hall and puts it in the lap of the girl, who is nearest the
door. When she awakes, she puts it into her neighbour's lap , and so
on . Last of all 'a Bruguma awakes, sees the foal in her lap and tries
to hide it, because the Street-boy has entered the room . She succeeds
in hiding it in her sleeve. The Street-boy says: You will certainly be
scolded , because you are late for breakfast!' 'Oh no,' she replies, 'it
is only the poor people, who have their breakfast early in the morning ,
we do not belong to them ! Then by witchcraft he caused the foal to
fill out of the sleeve and said : 'Look there, you have given birth to a
little donkey !' The girl is ashamed and wishes to keep him still; there.
fore she prays him to come to another banquet. Of this we hear in
Spring Myth No. VI. 17-69.
11. To be inserted Spring Myth No. II, 36 : He who is beaten in
the contest, will have to go to the land of gLing.
The Mythology of the Kesar Saga .
General Notes .
Up to the present, when editing Ladakhi folklore of a non
Buddhistic character, I have made use of the terms ' Pre-Buddhistic '

395
and 'Bonpo ' indifferently, because I did not expect to meet with more
than a single non -Buddhistic religion in Ladakh. Dr. Laufer's latest
publications of Bonpo MSS., however, make it advisable to separate
Bonpo mythology from the mythology of Ladakhi folklore ;
because, although both of them may have much in common , there
appear to be fundamental differences between them . In future, therefore,
when speaking of the mythology embodied, for instance, in the Kasar
Saga, I shall make 11.90 of the term ' gLing-chos ', i.o., mythology of
gling .
The material, from which I draw my information on the gLing-chos,
has increased a great deal since the first publication in Gorman of the
first half of the Kesar Saga; but I do not wish my ideas on the subject
to be taken for more than a theory. At present, the existence of the
gLing-chos can only be supposed for Ladakh ; but it may hereafter
become evident that the same or similar systems of mythology were
known in Tibet and many parts of Asia .
Sources of Information .
(1) The Kesar Saga. It is related in four parts:---
(a ) Prelude to the Kesar Saga, which tells of the creation
of the world and of the birth of the eighteen ages.
(6) First half of the Kesar Saga (Spring Myth ), which tells
of Kesar's birth in gLing, his wooing and marriage to
'a Bruguma.
(C ) Second half of the Kesar Saga (Winter Myth ), which tells
of Kosar's journey to the north, the killing of the giant
devil, marriage of the devil's wife to Kesar, and of
'a Bruguma's deliverance out of the hands of the King of
Hor, who had abducted her.
(d ) Kesar's Journey to China, which is a different version
'of the Winter Myth , and tells of Kesir's marriage to
the King of China's (laughter.
(2) The Ladakhi Marriage Ritual. This was published ante, Vol.
XXX, 1901, pp . 131ff.
(3 ) Songs of the Nyopa on their way to the bride's house.
marriage
(4 ) The drinking song, which is of a similar character to the 
ritual.

396
(5 ) The gLing- glu . This has entirely the character of a hymnal of the
gLing-chos. It is sung at the time of the Kesar Festival each
spring. So far, the gLing-glu of only two villages has been
collected, i.e ., of Phyang and Khalatse. It will, perhups, be
easy to collect it large number of these songs, which appear
to be of the greatest value for a proper understanding of the
character of Kesar.
The Cosmology of the gLing-chos.
In nearly all of the above-mentioned sources three large realms are
spoken of. Compare : Spring Myth No. IV. 20, 23, 26 ; Marriage Ritual
No. I. B. 1, 2, 3; gling-glu of Kualate No. XXVII ; gLing-glu of
Phyang No. 1.
1. sTang -lha, Heaven (lit., 'the upper gods' or ' gods above '; no
etymology is wanted , because the word is colloquial Ladakhi). Of this
realn . we hear in Spring Myth No. II; Winter Myth No. V. 8- 13 ;
gLing-glu of Phyang No. \';gLing-glu of Khalatse No. XXI, No. XXVII.
1. 2. From all these sources the following information can be drawn:
king reigns in Tang-lha , culler dBangpo -rgyabbzhin (according to
Dr. Laufer rGya -byin , compare under "Nanes '). He is also called
SKyer -rdzong -snyanpo and 'aBum -khri-rgyalpo. The name of
his wife is bKur-dman -rgyalmo, Ane-bkur-dman -mo or 'aBum
khri-rgyalmo, Both are called ' Alinighty': Compare gLing-glu of
Phyang No. V.
They have three sons, Donyod, Donldan , Dongrub. The youngest
is the most prominent figure. Lightning flashes from his gword out of the
middle of the black clouds (gLing-glu of Khalatse No. XXIX ). Thunder
seems to be caused by the walking of the gods (gLing-glu of Khalatse
No. XXI). Dougrub «lescends to the earth and becomes King Kesar
of gling .
The life of the pools in en idealised form of man's life. They
form in stato decoreling to the Winter Myth No. V , 8 -13. Besides a
king there are ministers , servants and subjects. They live in perfect
happiness and become oll without illness. They tend goats, called
Thara, apparently on the earth (Spring Myth No. 1). Kesar later on
discovers many of the stolen Thara in the devil's realm
The king and the queen often change their shape. The king becomes
a white bird (Spring Myth No. I. 3); the 
queen takes the shape of a
woman ( Spring llyth yo. IV. 8 ), of i Dzo (Winter Myth No. I. 53).

397
2. Bar-btsan, the Earth . (No otymology is Winted, the nanie
is colloquial Ladakhi for 'the firm place in the middle'.) Other names
are: Mi- yul, Land of Men (compare Spring 11 yth No. III. 7); gling ,
Continent (in colloquial Ladakhi). It is remarkable that beither the
Spring Myth nor the Winter Myth tolls us of beings, which entirely look
like men . That the eighteen Agus are something different, is shown by
their attributes.
The principal deity of the earth is mother skyabs-bdun (Marriage
Ritual No. I. B 2 ; Spring Myth No. VII. 19). It is probable, that
she is identical with brTanma, the goddess of the earth (compare
Jäschke's Dictionary), but at present nothing can be silid for certain ;
nor do we know , if father brTanpa is her spolise and 'aBruguma her
daughter. All this will, perhaps, become plain with the publication of
the Prelude to the Kesar Saga . Mother Kyabs-bolun riles a horse,
called bТsan -rta -dmar-chung (Spring Vyth No. \'I. 22).
Underworld (lit., the Nägas below ). Of this
2. Yog -klu , the 
realm we hear in Winter Myth No. 1. 14- 17 ; gling-glu of Khalatse
No. XXVII. 3, 4. Like Tang- ba, Yoy-klu also seems to be a kingdom .
There is a king, called ICogpo ( arringe Ritual No. I. B 3; Spring
Myth No. VII. 24 , 28); there are fois servants and subjects, famous for
children. The Klu -mo or Näginis are famous for
their large number of 
warned not to fall in love with them .
their beauty ; Kesar is 
According to all the material, which Jiay itcrumulated so far, it is
impossible to prove a clistinet antagonisme between the gods and the
popular superstition , girls have to take care not
According io 
Nāgas. 
have
to go near it well, where it male Nāga resides. All the Nāgas 
protectors of the Buddhist 'faith and show great unmity to
become 
all non-believers, if they can reach them .
The Colours of the three Realms.
They are mentioned in Spring Myth No. IV . 20, 23, 26; No. Vil.
22, 30 ; No. IX . 1; Winter Myth No. II. 21, 22, 23. The colour of
sTang- lha is white : it is perhape the colour of the light; Bar -btsan
is red : perhaps on account of the redkilish colour of the ground; Yog -klu
is blue: this may be due to the deep-blue colour of many West-Tibetan
lakes. It may be in connection with this system of colours, that at
the present day often three mchod-sten are erected, which are painted
blue, white and red. Also most of the Thatho show the white colour,

398
In how far this system of colours may have influenced the pantheon of
Lamaism , with its blue, white, red , green and golden-faced occupante,
cannot yet be shown .
The King of Hor, called Gur -dkar is roferred to in the prophesy
( Spring Myth No. IX . 1 -3 ), when 'a Bruguma takes a blue ribbon and
sits down on a blue carpet. This fact seems to suggest that he may be
connected with Yog-klu in some way or other.
The Devil bDud.
In the gLing-glu of Phyang No. 1, to the three realms of the world ,
as described above, a fourth is added, the Land of the Devil bDud .
Wo hear of the devil in Spring Myth No. I. 2- 12, where he tries to
carry away the heavenly goats and is killed. Apparently he comos to
life again ; for the first half of the Winter Myth tells of Kosar's victory
over him . The devil is in possession of great treasures (gling-glu of
Phyang No. III.) and of a girl, who is kept in an iron cage (Winter Myth
No. III.). As regards his size, appetite and stupidity, he closely resembles
the giants of European mythology and folkloro. The colour of the devil
is black (Spring Myth No. I. 2 ; Winter Myth No. II. 25). At first I
was inclined to believe in a certain connection between the black and
blue colours, because the hair of the Ladakhi girls is called “turquoise
in some popular songs; however, this expression may refer to the actual
turquoises, which are worn on the head. But also Kesar's pigtail, which
is certainly without turquoises, is called blue; and the pool of the klu
mentioned in Spring Myth No. III. 27, is called black.
Other names of the devil bDud are : Srinpo (Winter Myth No. III.
2 ); Curulugu (Winter Myth No. III. 8); 'aDre-tha-btsan -bog
(Spring Myth , Additions, No. IX ); Digpa (Winter Myth No. III. 26 ).
Of a very similar nature is Agu Za in Spring Myth No. III. 34 -45.
He devours not only Kesar, but also the sun and moon. Ho is in pos
session of the srin yzhu, the bow of the giants.
The devil bDud lives in a castle in the north (byang). There
can be no doubt, that the word byang means actually the north, because
everybody understands it in this sonse. Near the castle there is the
well of nectar (hdud-rtsi) and milk (Winter Myth No. IV . 17).
The Agus.
Dr. Laufer in his criticism tells me that the word akhu, from which
the word age may have developed, means 'urelo ' in Tiivian. As i

399
said before , it will be safest to look at the Ladakhi version of the Kesar
Saga from a Ladakhi point of view ; and in Ladakhi the word 'uncle '
is never expressed by akhu or agu, but by azhang.
With regard to this word , I can only repeat what I said in my German
Edition of the Kesar Saga: In Ladakhi the word agui serves to 
express
(1) a husband in general, (2) from & child's point of view, one of tho
principal husband's younger brothers, who is more than an uncle to the
principal husband's children ; he is something like their stop-father, as
the principal husband's wife is his wife too.
Thus the word agu may be a variation of the word pha -spun, father
brothers (Spring Myth No. V . 33, VI. 56 ) of Kesar. At present the
word pha-spun is always used in the sense of undertaker '. The pha .
spun have to burn the dead ; but it is possible that in ancient times the
relatives of the dead had to take care of this office.
It is quite true that neither the Spring nor the Winter Myth
tells us anything of a possible relationship between Kesar and the Agus.
The Prelude to the Kesar Saga ' will probably throw some light on the
question . The latter contains a list of all the eighteen Agus with their
characteristic marks. Many of them seem to possoss more than a single
name. This list is given below . As far as I can see, their attributes
point to an ancient zodiac and to the days of the week . A picture,
showing all the eighteen Agus, can, as I am told , be seen at Phagspa
gonpa, Lahoul, and at Komis, Ladakh.
According to the Prelude of the Kesar Saga, the Names of the
Eighteen Agus are the following : -
(1) Pasang ldan ru skyes , possessing the Friday, horns
growing. Characteristic mark : a goat's head.
(2 ) Anggar rtsangspo, Anggar, the lizard . Char. m . : a
lizard's head.
(3 ) Khra mgo khra thung, faleon's head, short falcon . Char.
m . : a falcon 's head .
(4) Kha rgan dgani (nyi), old mouth , day of joy . Char, m .;
a white beard .
(5) Kya rgodpo, wild soup-spoon . Char. m .: a soup-spoon
instead of a head .
(6) zLaba bzangpo, good moon. Char. m .: a moon instead of
a head .
* As given by Francke in the Indian Antiquary, 1901, p. 564.

400
(7) mD 'a dpon gongma, the high headman of bowmen. Char.
m .: an arrow blade ingtead of a head .
(8) Ala jong gol (this means, so I am told , the sole of a boot,
the stupid one). Char. m . : the sole of a boot instead of
a head .
(9) 'aBu dmar lamstan , red vermin , way leader. Char. m . :
a worm 's head.
(10 ) Shelgyi buchung, little boy of glass (or crystal). Char.
m . : a concave mirror instead of a hoad.
(11) dGani (nyi) gongba, day of joy, the collar. Char. m .: a
collar instead of a head ,
(12) Laglag rings, long hand. Chur. m .: a hand instead of a
head.
(13) rKang rkang rings, long foot (or leg). Char. m .: a foot
instead of a head.
(14) Bongnag Idumbu, black ass (Irumbu = a plant ?). Char.
m .: a donkey's head .
(15) bka blon Idanpa, the state-minister, the possessor. Char.
m .: a man's head .
(16) dPalle rgodpo, wild splendour, glory. Char. m . : an okl
man's head .
(17) rNa yyu rna 'athal, turquoise earring. Char. m .: a
turquoise instead of a head .
(18) zLaba dkarpo, white moon . Char. m .: a white shell
instead of a head.
To these Kesar or Kyesar has to be added as their leader, he is
the nineteenth. Holy numbers in the Pre-Buddhist religion of Ladakh
are 3 , 7, 9 and 18 ; but it is remarkable , that, whilst the tirst three of
these numbers are always quoted without a following number, the 18 in
always followed up by 19. For example : They digged a pit of 18 , 19
yards ’, there appeared 18 , 19 priests.'
If we take Kesar, the supposed sun hero, into the account, it is
not difficult to identify six of the nineteen Agus with six of the seven
days of the Tibetan week . Then the question remains : What could
be the probable origin of the remaining 12 ? Their number seems to
point to the Months of the Yoar, or to the Zodiac; but as I have no
moans available to compare their characteristic marks with those of
other lunar calendars, I should be very glad, if competent scholars
would offer an opinion on the subjoct.

401
As far as I can see, some of the Agus do not possess only a single
name, but several, though the characteristic mark will probably remain
the same.
The representatives of the weekdays are probably the following :
No, 19 , Sunday , No. 6 , Monday ; No. 9, Tuesday; No. 12,
Wednesday ; No. 7, Thuraclay : No. 1, Fridav.
The Spring Myth of the Kesar Saga.
This is the pertion of my mythology, that has met with the greatest
opposition . Not taking the names into account, there were two reasons
in particular, which induced me to believe in the possibility of a Spring
Myth : (1) The two forms of Kesar. One of them is ugly, and in this
Kesar is born (Spring Myth No. IV. 3, 4, 5 ). The other is beautiful,
and its attributes are the sun and moon (Spring Myth No. VII. 33).
These two forins he changes continually , as is shown by the Spring
Myth. (2) Kesar's ability to disappear altogether (Spring Myth
No. VIU . 5, No. IX. 6, 7 ; Additions No. 7).
According to Dr. Luufer's criticism , the Kesar Myti , is related
above, are very abrupt, and do not explain the motives for certain
actions. They are repetitions of certain passages of the Kesar Epic ,
in which important ideas were forgotten. He gives an example : The
story told in Spring Myth No. VIII. 33-41 is according to his conception
& weak reflection of a passage of the Kusar Epic, given in Additions
No. 10. With regard to this example, I must say that it does not hit
the point. The Ladakhis themselves distinguish between the two stories.
There is no more similarity between the two that there is between the
story of Dongrub's descent to the earth through hail and the story of
Zeus's descent in the golden rain . There is an endloss variety of versions
of the Spring Myth as well as of the Winter Myth, changing sometimes
considerably from one village to the next. Most of them are matter
learnt by heart. But all this material is never learnt by consulting the
Kesar Epic. These are stories handed down in those villages from
time immemorial. They are a necessary supploment to the gLing-glu ,
which would be unintelligible without them . Now the story, given in
Additions No. 10, is not only a portion of the Kosur Epic (dPe-sgrungs),
but is a portion of many oral taled as well (Kha-sgrungs). (The Ladakhis
themselves distinguish emphatically between dPe-sgrungs and Kha.
.sgrungs). In one of my MSS . of the Kha-agrungs, the story, given
under Additions No. 10, is told at the end of the story of the banquet,

402
that is, after Spring Myth No. VI. 16 , and the story Spring Myth
No. VIII. 33 41 in its usual place. Thus one and the same MS. contains
both of them .
If it be a characteristic mark of the Kesar Epic to give motives
for all the sudden disappearances of Kesar, that would not induce mo
to believe in the previous origin of the Epic ; it would confirm my belief
that there are fundamental differences between the epic and the oral
talos. All the oral tales agree on this one point, that Kesar is capricious
to the utmost extent. He comes and goos without a given reason ,
and likes nothing better than toasing.
That the form of the oral Kenar-stories, as we find them in the
different villages, is not the original, is shown by their conglomerate
character. They do not exhibit the labours of an editor but tell the same
story several times according to different versions. Examples are:
(1) Spring Myth No. II. 1- 28. The father asks his sons, who
would like to go to the country of men, and Dongrub
decides to go Now this story ought there to come to an
ond . However, the same tale continues (compare Additions
No. 11; Spring Myth No. II. 36 –42; gLing-glu of Phyarıg
No. VII) that he shall go who loses in the contest.
(2) The full stories of Kesar's birth on the earth (Additions
No. 2, 3, 4) were told in the following way : The first
MS. relates the birth -story (Additions No. 2), and thon,
without any break or preceding notice , continues with
Additions No. 3. The second MS, at first tells Additions
No. 4, and then continues with Additions No. 3. Thus
the child is born twice in the same tale.
(3) Spring Myth No: VI and No. VII ate two different versions
of the engagement story, told one after the other in the
same oral tale.
Now , if the oral tales (Kha -sgrunge) aro repetitions of the Kosar
Epic in spite of all this, it remains a wonderful fact, that all those stories
of wars and armies, which form the larger portton of the epic, are never
· repeated in the oral tales. As will be seen in the Winter Myth, the
defeat of the Giant of the North , as well as that of the King of Hor, has
nothing to do with armies and battles. The killing of both of them is a

403
private affair of Kosar. Nor do the oral talos ever tell us much of human
subjects of Kewar. The animals occupy a much more prominent place,
A number of animals are born together with Kosar (Additions No. 2, 3),
and another number of animals lament over Kosar's departure for his
journey towards the north (Winter Myth No. I. 39 -44). Looking at
this passage , it is remarkable, indeed , that 'a Bruguma is the only human
being who mourns on account of Kesar's departure. I do not wish to
offend anybody, but I must say, that I am simply unable to understand
a passage like that without accepting the possibility that it is meant to
express the mourning of Nature over the departure of the sun
I am far from believing that every incident in the Kesar Saga ought
to be explained on the ground that the whole of it is a Spring and Winter
Myth ; and I may have gone too far in my first outlines of the Kesar
mythology; but I am afraid my critica are making the same mistake,
if thby will not even accept the possibility of a Spring and Winter Myth
in the Saga .
In this connection it is also of some interest, that sun and moon
are attributes of Kenar's beautiful shape, and that according to gLing-glu
of Khalathe No. XXVIII. Kosar is compared with a flower, blooming
on all the high passes , and according to No. XXIX in the middle of the
black clouds lightning flashes from the godly king Kesar's sword .
The Loka-pālas.
There is some likelihood that the gLing-chos of Ladakh had four
deitios, corresponding to the Indian Loka- pālag. Up to the present I
have met with them only in the marriage ritual (compare Song No. I. B
4 -7 ). This is the list of them :
Sanskrit
Tibetan. English 
Region ,
(Dhyānibuddha).
Donyod-grubpa .. Fulfiller of the aim , Amogha -siddha North.
he has.
rDorje-sems-dp'a Thunderbolt, cours | Vajra-sattva East.
geous boul.
Rincben -byungidan Great price, po89088 Ratna-sambhaya South .
ing creatures.
&Nangba-mth'a -yas Eternal light . | Amitabha West.
This list shows that the Tibetan and Indian names correspond to
* great degree . Wo shall, perhaps, be obliged to accept the thco y

404
of a mutual influencing betweon North India and Ladakh in pre-Buddhist
times. Dr. Laufer for instance identifies dBangpo-rgya -bzhin with
Indra . Also the name of the glacier, Sengge-dkarmo-yyu-ral-can,
the white lioness with the turquoise locks (sengge = sinha) may be
mentioned .
What induces me to believe in the originality of the Tibetan names,
is the fact that two of them , rDo-rje-sems-dp'a and Rinchen -byung
Idap (the pronunciation of the latter is not Jung - ldan, but Byung-ldan
in Lower Ladakh ), contain more meaning in Tibetan than in Sanskrit.
I only wish to mention this fact. This subject was treated more fully
in the Globus.
The Tree of the World .
Wo bear of it in Marriage Ritual No. V -VIII; gLing-glu of Khalatse
No. ). Its roots grow in Yog-klu , its top touches Stang-lha ; it has six
branches,
Animism in the gLing-Chos.
Here I should like to mention the following personifications: skyeser,
the wind; sbang.char-zilbu, the rain ; sengge-dkarmo-yyuralcan, the
glacier; bya-khyung-dkrung-nyima, the sun ; byamo-dkarmo, the moon .
With ynyan, living in rocks and trees, I have met only in the wedding
songs of T'agmacig.
It is remarkable that several of these personifications are mentioned
together with the representatives of the animal world . Compare
Additions No. 3 ; Winter Myth No. I. 39 -44.
The Pre- Buddhist Origin of the Kesar Saga in Ladakh,
In my Gorman edition of the Kesar Saga I tried to make it probable
that the Kesar Saga was in existence in Ladakh at the time of the
introduction of Buddhism into Ladakh . Dr. Laufer tells me that I
bad better fx the culture-historical epoch of the Kosar Saga. He makes
the following suggestions: In Spring Myth No. I. 6 - 12 the use of the
sling as a weapon is mentioned , and in No. IV . 14, the use of a stone
Teasel. To this I may add that according to Winter Myth No. III. 25 ,
& stone sword is mentioned side by side with rifles and other weapons.
This suggestion of the stone age may be very useful under European
conditions, but is not of any use for fixing the age of a Tibetan tale.
The reason is that the stone age has lasted in Ladakh up to the present
day. I wonder hus iany stone vessels there are in the in my own private

405
household ! The sling of Agu dPalle is no more a weapon than that of
David , becauss dogs are not used here for tending goats. Goats and
sheep are called back with the help of stones thrown at them . I myself
have seen & stone axe in use, and in side valleye near Lamayuru a stone
hatchet. called kalam , is still in general use, so I am told. Pottery and
iron ware are well known in Ladakh; however, want of wood makes
both these articles extremely expensive, and side by side with pottery
and iron ware, stone ware cannot be dispensed with.
I therefore stick to what I said before: that apparently the Kocer
Saga was existent in Ladakh at the time of the introduction of Buddhism
into Ladakh. The lines in Spring Myth No. III. 5 and 12, sangs-rgyas la
blangbai gri, a knife to stab Buddha, were probably inserted at the
time, when enmity against Buddhism became general. The passage
in Winter Myth No. III. 26 and other researches have shown me plainly
that the passages, in Spring Myth No. III. 5 and 12, can only be translated
As I did .
In my Gorman paper I had also mentioned the fact that Kenar is
not at all scrupulous as regards the killing of animals. Dr. Laufer tells
me that this fact does not in the least prove the non -Buddhistic character
of the Kesar Saga, beoauso animals have been killed and are still killed
All over Tibet. I can only repeat what I said some time ago, that although
the Ladakhis are very fond of eating meat, it is very difficult to find
persons who are ready to kill animals. Most of the meat eaten by
Ladakhis is taken from animals which have died a natural death. The
fact that every body is simply swarming with lice is due to the fact
that nobody wishes to kill these animals.
I hope the publication of the different gling-glu , the Marriage Ritual,
the Winter Myth and Prelude to the Kesar Saga, will justify my attempt
to draw the outlines of the mythology of the gling-chos. Whether the
material of the Kesar Saga is originally Ladakhi, or whether it was
introduced intr. Ladakh from some other part of Asia, whether materials
In one of my former papers on the Kesar Saga ( Slobus, Vol. LXXVI, No. 20 )
ia 
I made a mistake take in saying that the Ladakhi versions of the Kesar Saga were
in 
the 
entirely different from the 
Mons Mongolian epic. This mistake was caused by a misunder.
of 
standing. As I had no means of comparing my Ladakhi MSS. with the Mongolian
compariter 
epic, I asked a friend to look up the latter in in the Strassburg University Library.
the
He apparently got hold of the wrong book ; for what he told me of woodmen and
other mythological beings could not well be reconciled with what I knew from the
Ladakhi version. Dr. Laufer, starting from my mistake, proves a long demonstra
tion of about 10 pages, that the subject in both is the same.

406
contained in the folklore of Ladakh are the original, or whether they
are borrowed from the epio,- -all this does not alter the fact, that in Ladakh
this material has taken the shape of a religion , which exercises its influence
up to the present day. I do not see why I should not write down the
outlines of a religion, whose influence cannot be denied by all who have
lived in Ladakh for some time.
General Position of the gLing-chos.
As has been stated , the Kesar Saga is not only known to
Ladakhis, but is recited in a great number of countries all over
Asia . Until it has been studied in all of them , it will be impossible to
decide where is the original home of the Saga, nor by which road it has
travelled from one country to the other European folklore and
mytbology also contains many parallels to the Kesar Saga, as has been
shown by Sohott, Ersch, Gruber, Grimm , Jülg and Potanin (according
to Dr. Laufer's criticism ). There are certain mythological ideas which
seem to be existent in a very large territory all over the globe. Dr. Laufer
mentions the frequent use of number 9; great power of the hero ; quick
growth of the hero when a boy ; two rocks, knocking against each other;
a smith , teaching the hero: - -all of which occur in the Kesar Saga.
If future researches should enablo us to see the route, which all of
those stories have followed in their wanderings, the question still remains,
why just these stories, which do not appear to be particularly amusing,
have travelled all over the earth. I could well imagine that solar
mythologies, grown, perhaps, out of animism (and if stones were considered
to be animated, why not the sun ?), many have arisen in difforent places
of the earth . These mythologies may have prepared the road for certain
mythological tales; and the relationship of the different mythologies
may rest in the fact that their originator, the Sun, is everywhere the
samo.
Note SA third Article on the Spring Myth of the Kesar Saga by Francke appeared
in the Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXXI, 1902, pp. 147-157. This is not printed again .
It consists of Philological Notos' on the names of the Kesar Saga, and a Tibetan
Alphabetical List of Proper Names' which are all given in the List of Proper Names
already printed in this edition (pp. 323–371). Besides there are English transla
tions of Francke's German Notes on some words and expresgions in the Tibetan
Text which appeared in the Helsingfors publication : a few of these, including
Dr. B. Laufer's emendations, have been incorporated in the reprint. (8. K .
Chatterji.]

[2]
THE WINTER MYTH OF THE KESAR SAGA,1
(English Translation by Dr. Batakrishna Ghosh and Dr.
Suniti Kumar Chatterji of the German Rendering
from the Ladakhi Tibetan Original
by A . H . Francke.)
1. Kesar the God-king of gLing was a strict hermit in the temple
of Yu 'abrug ( ' Turquoise Thunder': Blue Lightning ?). He had
joined it in the third month of the third year. 2. When about two or
three months had elapsed , Ane bKur dmanmo the Queen of the Gods
was having only bad and evil dreams. For that reason she went to the
door of the hermitage and prayed there in the following way:
3. 'O thou my grandson, ah yes, hear my voice!
4. O dreaming boy, ah yea, hear my voice !
5 . Ah, already for three nights I am having only evil dreams,
6. (I) saw the upper valley swept by a high flood,
7. Amidst the water, the King's castle, standing up, destroyed .
8. (I) saw in the lower valley a fire burning,
9. Over the flames, the King's castle, standing up, destroyed.
10 . (I) saw Curulugu,2 the devil, flying to Heaven,
11. King Kesar, however, creeping on the earth .
12. This year the fire strikes Curulugu , the devil.
13. This year the water strikes Kosar, the God-king.
14. If water is poured on the fire, then there will be a death.
15. Therefore do not go this yoar to bring ruin on the devil; it will
suffice if next year he comes to the land of gLing. Othou my grandson ,
thou noble one, hear, hear!' 16. Thereupon Kesar answered to the
Queen Ane bKur dmanmo: . .
1 This English version is published for the first time. A few of Francke's notes
are incorporated. The Tibetan Text and Francke's German Translation appeared
in the Suomalais-ugrilainen Seuran Toimituksia XV (Momoirs of the Finno-Ugrian
Society XV), Helsingfors, 1902.
Curulugu = Devil of the North : lugu = Klu dgu 'Nine Någas' 1

408
17. "Gracious Nene (= Aunt), ah yea, just hear me now,
18 . Ane bKur dmanmo, ah yea, be well disposed towards me!
19. I prepared a sacrificial cake, go big, on the hill to the right
20. I prepared a sacrificial cake, so small, on the hill to the left.
21. I shaped flowers out of butter like the rising sun and moon.
22. The whole I then painter with five colours of the rainbow.
23. Also I offered corn and bread offering in heaps.
24 . I filled an overflowing lake of holy water.
25. I burnt a sacred lamp lighting up the darkness.
26 . Therefore if possible give me leave for three years. If that
cannot be done, give me leave for seven months. In the worst chance,
give me in any case seven days!' 27. Then the goddess Ane bkur
dmanmo thought: 'My grandson (at all events) has grown up in the
virtues of Religion.' Thinking thus she again went away. 28. There
upon the Crystal wife 'a Brugmo ("aBruguma) said to the maid Darlha
gochodma:
29. * Prepare food as much as an Ice Mountain !
30. Prepare strong drink (in quantity) like the Maphang lake !
31. Then prepare heape of the best (lit, strongest) yak flesh !
32. Similarly.(flesh ) of the fattest yak cow !
33. Also prepare goat's flesh which melts in the mouth !
34. Similarly lamb's meat which increases strength !
35. Also prepare a well-grown young sheep!
36 . So go then, outside struggling for breath , yea, struggling
(i.e. go out in breathless haste)!
37. So go then inside, bowing thyself low, yea, bowing!
38. After she had said that they prepared the foodstuffs. Then
"aBruguma sang the following song :
39. ' If Kesar the God -king does not stay on and goes towards
the North ,
Who is then possibly the hope of 'aBrugmo, the loving
wife ?
40. If he does not stay on in the blue zenith and goes towards
the North ,
Who is then possibly the hope of the Sun and the Moon ?
41. If he does not stay with the high glacier and goes towards
the North,
Who is then possibly the hope of the white lioness ?

409
42. If he does not stay on with the high rock and goes towards
the North,
Who is then possibly the hope of the wild eagle ?
43. If he does not stay on in the deep lake and goes towards
the North,
Who is then possibly the hope of the gold -oyod one, the
small fish ?
44. If he does not stay on in the high mountain -pasture and
goes towards the North,
Who is then possibly the hope of the wild yak ?'
45 . As the loving wife 'aBruguma could not however separate
herself from the King, she kept him on for one month. 46. One day
Ane bKur dmanmo came about midnight and said :
47. " The wise man is without wisdom ,
The clever one is without cleverness !
48. King Kesar, when wilst thou go ?'- speaking thus she rebuked
him out. 49. When the next day broke, he felt himself unhappy,
ho was full of fright, vacillating and restlose. 50. By sun -rige he fetched
the foal rKyang rgod dbyerpa out of the garden of the round flowers,
and put the saddlo-trappings on him . 51. Then the loving wife 'aBrugmo
oame with all her maids and the maidens of the neighbourhood who
brought out burning cedar twigs and beer jugs garnished with many bits
of butter, and they all accompanied him . 52. For a half-day's march
Kesar accompanied (his wife), and then again (back) homewards, and
'aBruguma again accompanied back (outwards): while they were going
backwards and forwards in this way, evening fell. 53. Then Ane
bKur dmanmo came again who had transformed herself into a female
Dro with crooked horns and gave the foal rKyang rgod dbyerpa a lusty
thrust. 54. The King became angry, and cried out: 'How is that, that
at the start of my journey thou female Dzo dost poke at my horse
rKyang ngod dbyerpa ?' Although however he emptied a whole quiver
of arrows on the Dzo, not a single one of them struck him ( = her).
56. Theronpon the Sun disappeared as also the female Dzo, and
'aBrugmo came back home with her following. 1
1 In his Notes, Francke connects 55 with the proverb 'abrong dang nyima loru
abud nachung bomo rtunla lus 'tho wild yak and the sun disappear on the pass,
then the young woman, the maiden, staye on with her quern ', 1.e. to her remains
nothing but the common bard labour.

410
IT.
1. The God-king, both man and horre, Atayed back at the entrance
of the three valleys. During the night Ane Kur dmanmo shower .
big and fearful nightmare:
2. In the upper valloy the wolves howled,
In the lower valley the foxes growled .
3. The reed without lungs took to piping,
The dung without feet took to dancing.
The round dung at the side then sprang,
A storm on the pasa, a frightful one, began.
5 . In order to know whether Kesar could complete the journey to
the north or not, she frightened him in this way. 6. Then Kesar var
very much disturbed, and wept; on the next morning, however, all
(i.e. the terrifying things) disappeared . Ane blur dmanmo came and
offered him the shell of a nut full of flour and the shell of a nut full of beer
for hjg food . ' If thou prayest to the gods, then wilt get food of good
taste, of a taste which one can only imagine,' so said she, and gave a
saddle oloth for the horse which (lcoked) like a grade mat. 8. Then she
brought the guide a female fox of pearl white colour, and gave the
following exhortation :
9. "When the little fox creeps forward slowly, slowly,
Both, horse and king, then creep slowly after !
10. When the little fox flies forward , swiftly, swiftly,
Both, horse and king, then do like that!
11. When the little fox winding zigzagwise marches forward,
Both, horse and king, do like that!
1. When the little fox lays herself down to sleep,
Both , horse and king, then sleep peacefully !
13. When the little fox rises quickly from her sleep,
Both, horse and king, up! and hasten therefrom !'
14. Then they journeyed across & plain land, the ridge of a hili,
and through a sbeet of water, and when the sun went down, they made
a halt in a desert and empty valley. 15. [Kesar] felt hungry and
thought, ‘ I want to eat something!'. But as there was nothing but the
cold dish of the shell of the nut, he thought: 'How can I satisfy my
hungor (with this) ? There is not even a single bite and a single sip !'
and felt urbed in his mind. 16 . [But] the horse rKyang rgod

411
dbyerpa devoured the saddle cloth of grans mat, and throughout the
whole night made the sound curum curum . 17. As even before the
morning grey the King raised his head and looked (around himself], (he
saw that) the colt had eaten enough , and had dropped much heavy dung:
yet the grass mat (saddle-cover) was just as it was before. 18. Then
Kesar thought, 'Who knows! should not also what I am eating come
back again ?' When he ate and (found the food ) tasty as butter-meal,
sugar and syrup. However much he ate, it all came back again .
19. " That shows the kindness of my gentle mother!' thought he, and
regained courage. Then they travelled over nine passes, nine valleys
and nine high plateaux. 20. There on three passes stood three altars,
of red, white and blue colours. To these three altars (Kesar) offered the
following prayer :
21. ' A red altar stands on Red Pass,
A red altar is there raised.
Allow me to offer a piece of red scarf,
While I thought of the altars of gLing-land!
Grant me fulfilment of my thoughts (wishes) !
22. A white altar stands on White Pass,
A white altar is there raised .
A white scarf do I offer here,
While I thought of the altars of gLing-land !
Help me for fulfilling my thoughts!
23. A blue altar stands on Blue Pass,
A blue altar is there raised .
A blue scarf I wish to offer here,
While I thought of the altars of gLing-land !
Grant me the fulfilment of my thoughts!
24. Be mindful of (this) prayer and offering,
Oye God-kings all!'
25. Then he travelled through a black valley and a black plain
and saw a big black altar (standing) on a black pass. As (Kesar) thought
that that was the altar of the Devil-king, 26. he destroyed everything
from its foundation . The fragments he threw into water, the dust he
gave to the winds, and left no trace of it behind .
27. There a goatherd of the Devil-king was tending (his flock )
in the valleys on this side and that. The King sought the heavenly
sheep out of all the flocks of sheep and goats, he bound them , took

412
them with him and slaughtered them . The skins he stuffed and bound
them together with a rope of goat's hair. 28. Then the King asked him
(the goatherd) all about the Devil; but the latter said : 'Who art thou,
what art thou ?' and did not tell the truth. Then the King cried out:
Wherefrom bast thou got these heavenly goats ?' and seized (the herds
man ) by the collar and struck him with the right hand three times on
the cheok. 29. 'O gracious King, I knew not that thou srt Kesar,
the God-king of gLing ! Please, procure me deliverance in this and in
that life ! I shall also tell you everything about the Devil! 30 . At
present the Devil has gone to the west to spy about. The Dzerno
'abamza 'abumskyid is sitting imprisonod in an iron cage. If thou now
goest (thereto), thou wilt find only dead giants at the eastern , southern ,
westem and northern gates of the Devil's castles, which are stuffedi.
They are set on horses and clephants, and are furnished with sword and
flint. 31. They are however all empty; therefore do not be afraid :'
saying thus, he instructed him . When the king went forward , he
(however) felt afraid . It was as if his life would be taken . While going
he shot arrows, and here and there dust whirled up .
III.
1. Then the King went forward and opened the nine gates in order.
The innermost main gate was of gold. When he opened that he saw
the Dzemo 'abamza 'abumskyid sitting in an iron cage. 2. The
Dzemo said : "Who art thou then ?
Man that hast lost the way, this is a giant's nest !
Youth that hast lost the way, this is a giant's nest !
3. How wilt thou come out here again ?' ' I am Kenar, the God-king
of gLing ! do thou just come out!' inasmuch as he said that, he drew her
out of the iron cage, and for that reas n the Dzemo showed the God-king
much love, veneration and readiness for service. 4. When about
15 or 20 days had passed , then only came a strong wind, and then the
whole area trembled and quaked. For that reason Kesar was afraid
(and cried out), 'What is this ? What do I hear? Tell me that, Dzemo!'.
5 . The Dzemo answered : " The King himself is now returning back
home!' 'Where should we two, man and horse, then stay ?' 'He will
not arrive still within ten to fifteen days! Don't be anxious!' said she.
6. When about ten days had passed , there came more wind and earth
quake, as on that occasion, so that Kesar was afraid and asked, 'What's

413
the matter now ?' 'Now he has covered half the way,' answered she.
7. Then the Dzemo brought out of her right pocket seven little bones,
and seven cowrie shells out of her left pocket. Then she said : 'Haha,
huhu, hrum , hrum ,' and transformed the little bones into seven youths,
the seven cowrie shells however into seven maidens. Then she had two
pita of eighteen and nineteen fathom deep dug and put into them the
King and the horse.
8. Then the King Curulugu (the Devil) appeared and said ,
• Dzemo !
I smell human flesh ,
I smell horse flesh !
9. The Dzemo gave the following answer: 'There comes the King
carrying on his right shoulder hundred carcasses of horses and on his
left hundred human corpses, while he is still chewing an eight-year
old child. How shall I then come out and see from the iron cage a
human being or a horse ?' 10. The Devil said, ' Then fetcb my book !
Don 't hold it under your body, but offer incense, and bring it carrying it
on the head '. The Dzemo went, held (the book) under the body, stepped
on it, and burnt dog's dung as incense , and brought it. 1 . Out of the
book he said : 'The God-king Kesar of gLing, the man with the horse',
has come and is sitting nine rimpue deep under & lake and three hills !'
The lake and the hills are surely a symbol for the water of the copper
vessel and the three hearth -stones. 12. " The book I know not ! ' said
the Devil, and threw it into the fire. When half of it was burnt, the
Dzemo drew it out again and said, 'It may yet once again be necessary
for us ! '
13. Then the giant shouted : Dzemo, now I am hungry ! Prepare
the meal! ' Thereupon the Dzemo prepared shovels of four, cut to pieces
hundred dead horses, donkeys and human beings, made a sauce and gave
him (all that). 14. Dzemo, now I shall sleep ! ' 'Very well,' said she,
and made (the bed ) with pillows for the head and the carpet. He asked :
Shall I only have a little sleep like the birds, or shall I have a regular
deep sleep ?' Thereupon the Dzemo replied : When one is on a journey,
one should take only a little sleep like the birds; now that you have come
home, sleep well ! ' 15 . • Dzemo, how much truth has (just) been
uttered !' Then he fell asleep. When he had slept well, he did not well
wake up before one year, When sleeping he was snoring loudly .
16. But the Dzemo, as before, fetched the seven little bones and the

414
geven cowrie shells, laid wide the copper vessel and the hearth-stone,
and had the God-king, man and horse, dug out again . 17. The Devil
snored on , and when he blew out the wind, the God-king, man and
horse were pressed to the wall ; when, however, he took in the breath ,
both horse and man flew up to his nostrils. 18. Then the God-king got
afraid and could do nothing. The Dzemo however rode on the horse
rKyang rgod dbyerpa, and although they several times ran about on
the body of the Devil up and down, he did not betray by any sign that he
was aware of it. 19. Then the God-king Kesar took courage and also ran
about twice or thrice, riding on rKyang rgod dbyerpa (on the Devil).
20 . The Devil had nine lives. (Kesar) cut off all of them one by
one in order. Fint he cut off the now , then he knocked out the two
big corner-tooth ; thereupon he cut off the right as well as the left hand.
21. When he tore out both the eyes, (the Devil) said : "Who art thou ?',
(and) raised himself little and laid himself down on the other side.
I am dPallergod po !' 'Oh, I shall not die at the hand of dPallergodpo."
said (the Devil). 22. And when (Kouar) cut out his tongue, he cried
out, ' Ah woe, who art thou ?' ' I am dGani mgonpo of gLing !' 'Oh, at
his hand I shall not die !' 23. When both the ears were cut, (the Devil)
cried up, 'Oh, woe! who art thou ?' ' I am sDangma spyang Khra
( = 'the angry Wolf-Eagle ', name of one of the Agus) of gLing!' 'Oh, I
shall not die at your hand !' Thereupon the God-king Kesar spake :
24. 'skyer rdzong snyanpo, O godly Father, praise to thee !
bKur dman rgyalmo, O godly Mother, praise to thee !
Send me nine of the gods borrt with me!
To-day come to my help, [ye highly honoured ones!),
To my most eager wish, give success!'
25 . When he had spoken thus, he raised the stone sword in order
to slit the throat (of the Devil). Then came Ane bKur dman, the God
queen, and cried :
' The wise one is without wisdom ,
And the clever one without cleverness.
All (thy) thoughts are uprooted ! O God-king Kesar! Do not kill
(the Devil) with the stone sword ! Hurry up with the knife “ Three
finger-long " fur the sinful one!' 26 . Then he hastened with the dagger
' Three-finger-long for the sinful one, and the Devil) said : 'Art thou
the God-king Keser of gLing ? At thy hand must I die! This year
fire strikes me, and water strikes thee ! I am laid low under thy hand !'

415
With that he died. 27. Then (Kesar) threw the pieces (of the Devil)
into the water, the dust he threw away to the winds, and left no trace
(of him ).
IV .
1. The Dzemo 'aBamza 'abumskyld gave (Kesar) the food and
drink of forgetfulness, and (thus) made him forget the land gLing and
'aBrugmo, the castle and all people. Then whole day long they played
at dice and shot arrows; in this way she kept him content. In this
way three years passed .
2. King Gur dKar was leading along an army,
And broke asunder the nine towers of gLing castle.
3. He killed Shel dKar, the King's offspring,
And led away 'aBrugmo the queen .
4 . Of all this she wrote with blood in a letter,
And sent it forward by little birds in the house.
5. The latter flew once hither and once thither, but did not find
the God-king Kesar (did not meet him ). Their eyes were aching (from
the search ), the strength of their winge became lame; and they flew
back again . 6 . Ane bKur dman the Queen gave them a god-bath
and a god-cleansing, let them have rest, and sent them out again in the
search . When they were away, Queen Ane bKur dmanmo transformed
herself into a dove, and as she showed them the way they arrived in the
land of the Devil. 7. When just the God-king and the Dremo were
sitting at the game of dice, the birds of gLing let their voice resound
down from the sky. In order not to let (Kesar) hear anything the Dzemo
mode noise. Kesar, however, said , 'Just hear, just hear, O Dzemo,
I hear a voice like that of my birds of gLing coming ?' 8. You are
struck at present--
Já pará sugú
Shára ré siri !' 1
80 she made noise. For that reason Kesar seized the Demo by her
plait of hair and listened. 9. Then he spread out a white carpet and
laid upon it the body of a freshly killed (animal). Also a black carpet he
spread out and upon it he placed the carrion of a dead (animal).
He said , 'If ye bring good news, then seat yourselves on the white carpet,
Já = 12, pará = x , sugú - 3, shára = 8. ri = 1, miri = 3: these
terms are used at the game of dice.

416
and set upon the fresh meat! If however ye bring bad news, then
seat yourselves on the black carpet and set upon the carrion !' 10.
Thereupon all the birds seated themselves on the black carpet and set
upon the carrion . The big bird however loosened from his neck the
letter and offered it. Therein was written the news of all that had
happened hitherto.
11. Now when Kesar sought his horse rKyang rgod dbyerpa, it
had vanished. He did not understand whither it could have run away,
and whither not. When he asked the Dzemo about it, she said : "Who
knows? Nothing is known to me!' 12. Then King Kesar went out to
seek it, and came up on three hills and down into three valleys. Finally,
he saw it on the boundary between the looge rocks (moraines ?) and the
ice. It had a wounded back and wounded shank. Kesar was over
powered by sympathy and sorrow, and he called out to the horse. 13.
Then the horse came to him (and sairl): 'Ah, thou thoughtless King Kesar !
14. Formerly I abided with 'aBrugmo,
In the morning I used to get flour, butter and milk .
In the evening cakes and syrup of sugar.
When she came down, she used to fondle me;
When she went up, she patted me,
Saying, " my horse, how lean thou hast become !"
15. For three years I stood before the door of Dzemo.
In the morning I used to get ten loads of wood,
In the evening I used to get ten loads of sand,
When she got up, she used to kick me with her foot,
When she got down, with her fist she used to strike me,
Saying, " Thou horse, thou art much too fat!"
Then I had my fill of weeping.' 16 . Kesar replied : " Thou art quite right.
The Dzemo has turned my head too. We should now go to the upland
The horse
of gling ! But how should your wounds be healed ?' 17. 
said, ' In my right ear there are three good medicaments which my mother
'aBruguma has placed there; in the left ear is a sharp little knife. Lead
me to the spring of nectar and milk and wash me, cut with this small
knife and apply the medicine; then I shall be healed '. 18. (Kesar) did as
the horse had instructed him , and the latter became more fiery and better
than he was before.
19. A child , a girl, was born to Kesar and the Dzemo ; it was
still young and a suokling. 20. Kesar followed the Dzemo and said :

417
* As the child is 80 small, thou oans't not oome (with me). In one year
I shall come (again ) in order to fetoh the mother and the child .' Yet
(the Dzemo) did not listen , became proud (angry), and cried : 'I
shall (nevertheless) go with you !' 21. Then the horse gave sounsel:
'Let her sit behind on my back and side. When we come in the
midst of a river, I shall give her a kiok (push ), so that she will reach
the other bank.' Saying thus, he (the horse) let her sit behind on his
back and carried her. 22. Then he gave her the push and throw
her on the other bank . For that reason she was very angry, brought
the unweaned child (the buckling). and said to Kesar, 'As thou, the
father, art of a noble lineage, eat up the upper half (of the child )! As
I am of lower lineage, I shall eat the lower balf !' Then she made two
parts of the child at the hips and set there ohewing the lower half. 23.
Kesar however burnt the upper half, and arranged the bones which
were left in the form of a picture of sainte 1 and erected a little mchod
rten (stäpa ) and went further on.
y .
1. On the way to the frontier between Hor and gling, (Kesar)
wrote a letter on the upper part of his saddle, (supported ) on the stirrups,
and sent it up to the castle of gLing. (In conformity with this letter,
evidently, there came to meet him hundred faithful riders.) 2. Thus he
arrived at the frontier of Hor, and rode from the Asalsal pass in the
company of hundred riders; from the Masalsal pass he rode in the
oompany of ten riders, and from the Shangmo 'adur ( = * Running
She-wolf') pass he rode, man and horse, quite alone.
3. In the spring from which the drinking water for the King
Gur dKar of Hor was drawn, he sank a big and dirty oup encircled with
araw. Then he wetted his torn shoes therein , and himself put on a
very torn and much patched-up cost, and throw himself back foremost
into the spring. 4. Then the maid from Hor oame, (named ) Bhag
'adzommno , to fetch water, (and 
cried ): This beggar and tramp bas
defiled our drinking water ! Who art thou then ? Thou bad, repulsive
vagabond !' Thus she said , and abused him lustily. 5. Kesar replied :
'Oh, I am a vagrant man come here from far away ; I am tired, exhausted
and breathless!
1 1.e. by mizing the powdered bone-fragments with earth and stamping them
rith figures of saints (Francke's note).

418
If thou art in hurry, then step over me!
If thou art not in hurry, go around me!'
So said he, and did not get up. 6. The maid went back to the castle
without drawing water, and related to the beloved wife 'aBruguma
the wholo incident; 'aBruguma related the matter to King Gur dKar.
7. King Gur dKar appeared before (Kesar), and asked what it signified .
Kesar replied , (by singing the following) like a song with its melody:
8. 'Did I go away as a monk, or did I not go ?
9. Yet I went up, oame into the realm of the gods.
10. King Gya bzhin himself I met there,
11. Lord, Servant, Son , Wife, Maid , are all in good health there.
12. Every subject waxed there and flourished,
13. Grow old without pain , and lived in eternal happiness.
14. Did I go away as a monk, or did I not go ?
16. Yet I went down, came into the underworld .
16. King 1Cogpo himself I met there.
17. Everybody was there rich in children, and glad .
18. Did I go away as a monk, or did I not go ?
19. Yet I ascended, came to the castle of gLing .
20. King Kesar died in the land of the Devil,
21. Sumptuous food and presents there are in heaps !
22. If a Lama is big, there are well ten thousand,
23. If he is not so big (barpa), then still a thousand ooins.
24 . If . Lama is small, there is still a hundred .
26. Each monk (drvapa ) gets moreover yak and horse.
26. I, as a monk, received a black little sheep !
27. Previous year * yak -cow ('abrimo) disappeared from gling.
28 . This year & yak calf was born in Hor,
29. To see whether it is 90, I a monk camo hither.'
30 . The King of Hor spake: 'Monk, thou art only a disguised monk !'
and bound (Kesar) fast to & pillar. After a short while he freed himself
loose, went away and was no more there .
31. Kesar went into the poa-field of the smith Nagshangahang
( 'the Clever Black One') and ate them (the peas) for food. Thon Chos
agron ma ( Light of Dharma') the daughter of the smith went out,
seized him and brought him (in ). 32. When he came within the
house of the smith, Kesar said , 'I am the son of the father (i.e. of the
emith ) At the time when the army of Hor was led into the land of

419
gLing, my mother taught me and said , “ Thy father is also of the
land of Hor" . 33. All children of the same condition had said,
“ Thou art one who hast no father-- a bastard ! Thou art not equal to us " .
Then my anger blazed out, and I related this weeping to my mother.
Then my mother instructed mo'. 34. The emith spoke: 'If thou art
really my child, then thou must show (me) all (my) working tools (i.e.
piok out from a heap of mixed tools those belonging to the smith Nag
shangahang) '. Kesar replied: " To -morrow I shall pick them out;' and
during the night cried to Ane bKur dmanmo. 35. The Ane remained
invisible (without body), and said : 'From morning to midday when
all tools have been put in a heap, I shall transform myself into a turquoise
fly and git upon all the tools belonging to the smith. Then be mindful
and say, "the hammer big as a horse's head is not there " .' 36. When
(Kenar) acted according to the speech of the Ane, he was believed , and
(they) handed over to him all the tools, and he remained there learning a
smith's work.
37. 'aBruguma did not love at all (the King of) Hor, fled and
concealed herself continually. Then 'aBrugu said to the King): it
was like a song:
38. 'Almost every one keeps a dog as his watcher, keeps as watcher !
But 'aBrugmo keeps a wolf as her watcher, keeps 88 watcher !
If thou bringest an old wolf, fie on the animal, fie on the
animali
If thou bringest a small wolf, the poor animal, the poor animal !
Seek out a strong wolf, and stay one year, stay one year !
39. Almost every one keeps a yak as his draught animal, as his
draught animal!
But 'aBrugmo keeps a brong (= a wild yak) as her draught
animal, as draught animal!
If thou bringest an old brong, fie on the animal, fie on the
animal!
If thou bringest a small brong, the poor animal, the poor
animal!
Seek out a strong brong, and stay one year, stay one year!
40. Almost every one koeps a mule as a riding animal, as a riding
animal!
But 'aBrugmo keeps a kiang ( = wild horse) as hor riding
animal, ay riding animal!

420
If thou bringest an old kiang, fie on the animal, fie on the
animal!
If thou bringest a small kiang, the poor animal, the poor
animal !
Seek out a strong kiang, and stay one year, atay one year!
41. 'Kesar will come back in three years,' thought 'aBruguma;
but although she waited (80 long), there oame no news of his coming .
Then spoke sDig spyod rgyalpo ( = 'King Sinful Conduct'), the
minister of Hor (to the King):
42. " Thou art not the King Gur dKar ( = White-tent), O no, a
white ox!
A young white ox whose horns can hardly be seen !
One has to cry Riri, otherwise he will not be led, 2
One has to cry Khyo khyo, and also striko lustily.2
Some hundred beautiful fairies there are in the kingdom of
the Gods.
Let us fetch at least one! 80 I said to thee long ago.
What 'aBrugmo takes for food, that we give her then ,
What 'aBrugmo clothes herself with, that we put upon her,
We also call her 'aBrugmo— that I advised the already
long ago.'
43. The King of Hor replied :
* The old King Dig spyod, he was a great hero.
But now our sDig spyod is only an old man,
Now he takes gladly to the spindle and sits by the fire-plaoe.'
44. aDig spyod spake:
* Thou art not King White-tent, a white donkey only ;
It is a pity that thy ears are not a bit longer!
Some hundred beautiful nägis thofe are in the underworld ,
Let us fetoh at least one so I said to theo long ago.
What 'aBrugmo takes for food, that we can give her then.
What 'aBrugmo olothes herself with , that we put upon her,
We also call her 'aBrugmo- -that I advised thee already
long ago.'
1 The above was 'aBruguma's ruse to gain time from the King of Hor for
three years
? Riri and Khyo thyo are terma used in driving cattle .
Gog Itag - the raised place at the side of the ashes.
7B

421
45. The King of Hor answered :
" The old King &Dig spyod , he was like unto a lion !
But now our sDig spyod is no better than a fox.
Now he seeks old leather and carries it to his den.'
46. Then 'aBrugmo stayed about a month in the hermitage yYu
'abrug, and did not at all go out. (Living) among the Lamas, clothed
in cowl and coat, she stayed there and acted as if she knew nothing, -
like & monk. Then the King of Hor made quite a fine device and led
her away from there.
VI
1. After about a year had again passed , there came all the heroes
from gling disguised as horse-dealers to the land of Hor. Agu dGāni
mgonpo, dPalle rgodpo, dGung Phrug Khra skya ,---whiob three
embarked on their first transaction, each riding on a horse and loading
another horse. King Gur dKar of Hor saw them , and being very much
pleased , he sang (this) song:
2. 'Yea, during the father's time there came no dealer,
O no, during Gur dKar's time horses were not offered cheap.
As a son is born to me, now come here dealers.
Now that Ollader ( = Olba dar, ' Black Extension ' 1) is born ,
horses are held cheap.
Now I buy all the horses for the benefit of my son,
Now I buy all the slaves for the benefit of my son.'
Yagshikhob, Yagahikhob ? ', shouted he. 3. 'aBruguma spake: 'All
of these are the heroes of gLing : they have come to spy on youl Gur
dKar did not believe it, and said , 'No, no '.
(The second MS. from Khalatse)
4. 'aBrugmo said to Gur dKar of Hor: " The foremost horse is
Kesar's horse rKyung byung dbyerpo; that thou shalt not get! The noxt
one is sNgorog pon pon ; that, too, thou shalt not get ! The following one
is Khyuma thsa langs, of the God-king, the great lion : that, too, thou
1 The name of the son of Gur dkar and 'aBruguma.
2 A shout of joy, which can be heard among the Yarkand traders. The
expression is believed by the Ladakhis to be Russian — but it is not Russian in any

422
shalt not get. 5. The foremost Agu is Agu Bongaag Idumbu ; him thou
shalt not get. The next one is dPalle rgodpo of gLing ; him , too , thou
shalt not get. The following one is Khargan dgani ; him , too, thou shalt
not get.'
6. King Gur dgar ide hor believed it and went into the castle.
While he stayed, the three mon of gLing went back to their battle camp,
and dPalle rgodpo gave to the arrow which had the power to come back
of itself (the following) instruction : 7. " Thou must (now ) fly into the
castle of Hor and strike the decorated wooden columna. Do not come
back without bringing a mouthful of the flesh of the King Hor pahalde !'
So saying he shot the arrow to the castle. 8. Then the arrow struck
the decorated wooden column, and because it was the htart-vein of
(the King of) Hor, the latter was overcome with great pain, No one
could draw out the arrow , and the son of the smith Hemis was called ,
the young gmith Kun byung thsar rnyed ( = 'He who finds liberation for
all creatures '). 9. The latter called out to the maid named bKur
'adzom : 'Bring the big pair of tongs! Bring the big hammer ! An arrow
from gling struck into the decorated columns of the King Pahalde.
Great pain in the heart is come upon King Gur dKar ! ' So he said , and
sent away the maid . 10 . When he had waited a little, he went with
the maid to the castle. Reaching there he taught the noble 'aBruguma
a charm : ''aBruguma! recite a prayer!
11. May the golden gold-castle pass away!
May the castle with nine towers remain !
12. May ySerral and yYural be disinherited !
May Shelli búzhung have the heritage!
13. May the King Pahalde be wife-less! ***
May King Kesar have the wife !
Weep while speaking thus', said he. 14. Then the young smith drew
the arrow out and stuck it into a twig of the altar. After waiting a little,
(the arrow ) extracted out of the breast of the King of Hor a mouthful
of flesh, and also took away the altar-traveller from there, made a hole
in the wall, and sped away from there. Then it went back to dPalle.
1 yder-ral = 'Golden -lock', name of a girl, and yYu -ral = ' Turquoise-lock ',
were the children of 'aBruguma by Gur dKar ; Shelll bázhung = ' the Small
Son of the Mother of Pearl', was the aon borne by 'aBruguma to Kesar,
? A bower, if possible of cedar, ia dedicated to the gods; twigs from this are
stuck on the house or on the lha-tho erected outside,

423
15. dPalle of gLing feared that the arrow was tricky (naughty), and
concealed it under a big rock . The arrow (however) came back into the
quiver, while a fire burnt in its groove, and it carried a mouthful of the
flesh of the King of Hor. 16. Thereupon the young smith Thar rnyed
went to the camp of the men from gLing and said : 'Go back again to the
land of gLing ! I shall gradually conquer the King of Hor by stratagem !'
For that reason all the men of gLing went to gLing-land.
VII.
1. Thereupon the young smith went back home and spoke to his
father, the smith Hemla: ' I shall now go to fetch charcoal.' On which
the father replied : ' Don't go into the valley to the right! It is the
garden of the Gods, of the Pahalde of Hor ! Go into the valley to the
left, extinguish the coals and bring them .' 2. The young smith Thar
royed and the smith-girl Choron (= chos-agron), both (however) went
into the Goda' garden of Gur dKar ide, and although the smith-girl
Choron said , 'It is a Gods' garden , don 't cut anything'. The young
smith showed his might and spake:
3. "Yo Gods, go ye all to the kingdom of the Gods!
Ye Nāgas, go ye all to the kingdom of the Nägas.
4 More than a hatchet oan is struck without a hatohet !
More than an axe oan is struck without an axe !
More than fire can is performed without burning!
Akani nikani acini mantål ! '
5 . After he had uttered this prayer he felled wood. The coals were
extinguished and laden on the donkey. Then they went, and when they
came in front of the big water, the young smith Thar rnyed said : " The
hoofs of the donkey will get wet,' and broke into pieces the hoofs of
the donkey on a stone. 6. The girl cried out, ' Art thou mad ? Thou
bast in fact smashed the feet of my father's donkey !' He said , ' (Other
wise) the boots of the donkey would get wet '. Thereupon the smith -girl
Choron ran home and related this to the father, the smith Hemis : 7 .
Father, he has laid fire to the Gods' garden of our King Gur dKar . And
when he came to the ford , he said , " the boots of the donkeys will get wet !"
and he smashed all their hoofs on a stone. O , the father has got an evil
childl' 8. As she spoke thua, the father, the smith Hemis, got angry,
seized the big iron hammer and the big pair of tongs, and went 
towards

424
the son in order to thrash him . When the father struck the son, all the
donkeys were laden with coal and their hoofs were in the most beautiful
(condition). 9. The father spoke to the son : " Thou hast (thus) laid fire
to the Gods' garden of King Gur dKar !' and scolded him away. The son
epoke: 'Father, thy daughter has cavilled me! If fire has been laid
to the Gods' garden , then let the father himself look to that ! If the
hoofs of the donkeys are broken , then let the father himself look to that !'
10 . When the father looked into it, the Gods' garden was green as
before, and the hoofs of the donkeys in the most beautiful (condition).
Then father and son reached home arranging the coals. 11. Then the
father said to the daughter: ' Thou liar!', struck her with the big hammer,
tore out her flesh with the big pair of tongs, and did her much injury.
12. As the son then continually went on working on an iron chest,
the father one day spoke: 'Hey, young man ! do for once a proper)
bit of work ! What art thou doing day after day making only that chest ?'
13. The son replied : 'Oh, if one sits in this chest, one can see the kingdom
of the Gods as well as the kingdom of men !' The father spoke : 'How
80 ? I shall once see, indeed !' Thereupon he let the father go into the
ohest. 14. When he was therein , the son closed the lid and turned the
look and carried (the chest ) away from there on his back . The father
oried out of the chest, ‘ Whither art thou carrying me now ? Hey,
young man, thou bad son !' 15. The son replied: 'I am carrying the
father away in order to throw him into the water !' Whereupon the
father begged : 'O son ! throw me not into the water! Hullo ! I shall do
what thou wilst tell me to!' 16. The son spoke: ' If thou makest me a
wire-rope with which one can come up to golden castle of King Gur dKar,
then I shall release the father! 17. Take an oath on the Gods' kingdom !
And when thou takest an oath also on the land of men, I shall let thee
out!' In this way (be) loaded him with oaths, and let him out. Then
the two of them worked day and night on the wire-rope and finished it.
VIII.
1. Then the son bathed seven days long in milk in order to cleanse
himself of the spots of the smithy. Now he went, carrying the wire-rope
into the castle, throw up (the rope) and its end remained hanging above.
2. Then he firmly seized the rope, and as he climbed up there came from
heavon a white and a black raven, which were fighting with each other .

425
The white raven succumbed. After the black one had conquered , he
threw down the white one. Then Ane bKur dmanmo spake:
3. ' The wise one is without wisdom ,
The counseller is without counsel !
4. Even now a spot from the emithy has not been removed from thee!
Wash thyself once more thoroughly in the milk -bath !' 5. After Kesar
had come back, he washed himself again thoroughly in the milk -bath,
and remained (therein ) some seven days. Then he came again , carrying
the wire-rope, into the castle. “If my father and my mother are
honourable people, then may the wire-rope remain hanging up on the
castle !' So he spoke, flung the rope, and it remained hanging. 6 .
When he again climbed by the wire-rope, there came again & white and a
black raven, which were fighting with each other. This time the white
raven won and the black one fell down defeated on to the earth. 7 .
' I shall win !' he thought, firmly seized the rope, and came up on to the
castle . When he looked down out of the window, (he saw that) King
Pahalde of ySerralcan and y Yuralcan carried both of them (in his arms)
and slept. 8. The noble 'aBruguma was spinning threads white as
mother-of-pearl on a golden spindle. As the turquoise blue chalk -stone
was like s lake to see, Kesar could not go (down), and threw down the
golden finger-ring. 9. ' Touch the finger of the noble 'aBruguma!'
said he, and the golden ring rolled about on the chalk-stone (of the floor.
planks) and then struck the finger of the noble 'aBruguma. 10 .
'aBruguma thought: 'Ah, now Kesar has arrived !' Then Kesar came
down from the window , and changed himself into a cat. He slipped into
the bed of the King of Hor and pricked them both, Serralcan and
yYuralcan, with the poisoned dagger. 11. Both the children cried .
Then the father spoke: 'Alolo !
A hundred people should seek all the lice with sharp eyes!
A hundred people should seek all the lice with sharp nails !'
12. 'aBruguma thought (at that): ' He has already come who will
Book out thy lice! When thereupon the King of Hor had waked up, he
(bogan) to fight with Kesar. The Queen Ane bKur dmanmo said : 'Oh
'aBruguma !
13. The wise one is without wisdom ,
And the woman of counsel is without counsel !
14. So do thou put paste under Kesar's feet,
So do thou put iron (i.e. hard) poas under Gur dKar's feet!'

426
'aBruguma apoke;
15. ' I am the consort of Kesar, betrothed with the white band !
The sustainer of the clan to Gur dKar, to whom she (i.e.
herself) has borne a son.'
16 . Then she mixed the flour-paste with the peas and strew them
(about). Then came Ane bKur dmanmo, transformed herself in a dove,
gathered the peas and placed them under the feet of the King of Hor.
Also she gathered the paste and put it under the feet of Kesar. 17.
As the King of Hor had put on boots, he fell on the hard peas. Kesar's
foot stuck on the flour-paste; he did not fall, remained (erect), and won .
18. Then he bound the beard of the King of Hor to the pillar, knelt
on his broast, and the King of Hor besought Kesar for mercy:
19. “Not knowing what I was doing, I had formerly destroyed the
gLing castle.
Not knowing what I was doing, I had formerly carried off
'aBrugmo.
20. Kill me not now , O God-king, thou great one!
I indeed wish to serve you, O God-king, thou great one!
21. It is warm in Hor, here should you live in winter ;
In gLing it is cold , there should you live in summerl'
When he had pleaded thus, Keper spoke:
22. 'I was one year old when I struck the Andhe bandhe out of
the east;
A boy, I triumphed over them all!
23. When I was two years old, I killed the seven spirits ;
A boy, I triumphed over them all!
24. When I was three years old , I killed the man with nine heade;
A boy, I triumphed over them !
25. 
When I was four years old, I killed the corpse-eating giantess ;
A boy, I triumphed over this !
26. When I was five years old, I killed Khung 'abru 1;
A boy triumphed also over this !
27. When I was six years old, I struck 'Poison-fresh ' the rock :
A boy triumphed also over this !
1 A kind of winged dragon which moven about the clouds and 
produces
thunder. (According to another view , thunder is heard when the gods move in the
sky.)

427
28. When I was seven years old , I killed Ralril (= 'the Long
haired One'), the white yak bull:
A boy triumphed also over this
29. When I was eight years old, I killed Curulugu the Devil:
A boy triumphed also over this!
30. But Gur dKar, thou base one, whom hast thou killed ?'
31. Thereupon spoke Ane bKur dmanmo : 'What art thou then
doing now ? 'aBu dmar lam bstan1 of former times,
does he not come into thy mind ?
The abducted a Brugmo, does she not come into thy mind ?
Does not any louse bite in thy socks ?'
32. When she spoke thus, Kesar drew out the knife ' Three-finger
long' and struck it into the body of the King of Hor . Then so much
fat came out that Kesar's body was drowned in it . 33. Ane bKur
dmanmo came, but although she plied hither and thither with shovel
and spade, she could not succeed, and Kesar offered a prayer-offering:
34 . "May this disappear, before the nine Gods born with me!
May this disappear before the nine spirits born with me!
May this disappear before the eighteen Andre barandre
( = Andhe bandhe) of the East!'
36 . After he had spoken, they all came and did away with the
flesh , blood and fat of (Pahalde). The King of Hor was not yet dead,
and as he still had the death-rattle, Kesar went into all the upper rooms
in order to search. 36. There was somebody in the temple who was
praying with covered head . Him Kesar seized and thr“w down from
the tower of the castle. When he then came and examined, the King
of Hor was dead and gone.
IX .
1. Kesar spoke to 'aBruguma: 'Now , thou widow , come now with
(me)!' and 'aBruguma said to the two children : 'If ye two will come with
me, then bite into this milk -cake! and if ye do not wish to come with me,
then bite into this blood-cake!' 2. She kneaded a milk-cuke and blood
cake, offered them to the two children, and the children spoke: 'We
shall not go to the land of gLing ! we shall stay in the land of Hor to
1 'Red Worm Path-shower', an Agu who accompanied Kasas on his journey
to China.

428
Avenge our father!' and ate the blood-oake. 3. Then Mother
'aBruguma gave the children sweet-tasting food , and travelled with
Kesar to the land of gLing
4. In the middle of the way there was a rock gate named Brag thsan
rdung rdung ( = the Striking Rock '). When Kesar (once formerly) had
come there, he had said to the rock gate : ' I shall bring (thee) the heade
of both ySerralcan and yYuralcan !' 5 . For that reason Kesar spoke
to 'a Bruguma: 'Something has been left behind !' and went back,
'aBruguma said : “ Thou wishest to go to kill my children !' and did not let
Kegar go . 6 . Then Kesar replied : ' I shall not kill them !', went back
and came before the castle of Hor. He called the two children : 'Hey,
Serralcan and yYuralcan, ye two ! The mother has sent you a message!
Just look out of the window !' 7. The two children angwered : “We
have no time to look out ! Whoever that may be, may he come in !'
' Look out, only for a moment! I must go farther (i.e. I cannot wait)!'
The two looked for a moment out of the window . 8. Then Kosar tore
away with the ends of his bow their heads and brought them . He
(now ) kneaded much flour and butter, and put the heads in the midst
of it, and carried them away. 9. When he then came to the noble
'aBruguma, the army of gLing was (Assembled ) at the rock gate. Kesar
said to 'a Bruguma : 'When thou wert (still) in the country of gling,
thou wert clever! If thou art clever even now, then distribute this
flour with butter to the whole army! 10. Do not let anything remain !
Neither finish it too (soon )!' 'aBruguma distributed to the whole army,
and it happened in equal measure. Then came out of the middle of the
flour and butter the heads of the two children . ll. 'aBruguma fainted
& Little ; (but) Kesar offered the heads of the two children to the rock
gate. 12. Then they went out of the rock gate, and Kesar and
' a Bruguma together with the army went to the land of gling. They
arrived in gLing, and remained (i.e. lived) there.

[3 ]
A LADAKHI BON -PA HYMNAL,1
By Rev, A . H . FRANCKE.
INTRODUCTION .
It has become evident, that the ancient religion of Tibet, known
as Bon -chos, is not yet extinguished , even in those parts of the country
which are professedly Lamaist. In such places Lamaism has become
the religion of the clergy, but Bon -chos has continued to live among
la ymen .
In all the Ladakhi villages each spring the Kyesar festival
is held , when the malo population exercises itself in archery. On this
occasion the village band has to play and the gling glu is gung.2 The
gling glu seems to be a remnant of the hymnal of the ancient Bon -chos,
And I have been so fortunate as to come into possossion of the gling
glu of two villages, Phyang and Khalatse. They are entirely
different from each other, although the subject in each is the same, but
it is to be remarked that they both consist of nine songs. It is probable,
that in ancient times more than nine songs were known in a village ;
but as nine is the number which predominates over everything, the
people were careful to sing neither more nor less than nine songs at a
time.8 And so it has happened that, when many of the ancient songs
were forgotten , nine remained living in the minds of the people, simply
because a Kyeser festival could not be allowed to pass by without the
usual set of nine hymns.
These hymns are perfectly unintelligible to anyone who has not
previously studied the Kyesar Myths. But Ladâkhi laymen, who
know nothing of the life of Buddha, Padmasambhava or Tsongkhapa,
know the life-story of Kyesar very well.
It is worth noticing, that in Phyang the Spring-hero's name is
pronounced Kyesar, not Kesar.
1 Reprinted from the Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXX, 1901, pp. 359-364.
? A reference to this festival we have in VI, 5 , 8 below .
The people will alwaya play nine seta of Polo , to finish a game.

430
THE HYMNS.
Phyanggi gling -glu rname yin
THESE SONOS ARE THE GLING-GLUS OF PHYANG .
I.
Kyesar, Conqueror of the World .
1. steng nang 1ha yul kun nonpari
amala bu zhig Itams.
A son, conquering the land of the gods in the heights,
Was born to the mother.
kun nonpari
2. yog nang klu yul 
gogzalhamola lha phrug rig Itams.
A godly child , conquering the land of the lower water spirita,
Was born to Gogzalhamo.
3. bar nang btsan yul kun nonpari
amala bu zhig Itams.
A son, conquering all the lands of the earth ,
Was born to the mother.
4. bdud nang bdud yul kun zonpari
lha phrug cig Itamssed lei.
A godly child , conquering all the lands of the devil,
Is born, hurrah !
TXIT NOTES.
1. etc., the termination pari is a dialectical form of the participle and
corresponds to mkhanni.
gogza may be gogsa, a parallel case is dagsa , 'now ', the s of which is
often pronounced liko z.
3. The word bar btean, earth, was separated by nang only for the
reason to form a sentenco corresponding to the others.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
1. Is said to refer to Kyesar's victory over his two brothers, see
Kesarsage II. 36 -42. 4. rofors to Kyosar's victory over the
giant of the North , who is called " Dud.

431
II.
Lullaby to the Young Kyesar.
1. stod nang stodna, rgyallham chenmol stangepola stod.
When you praise, praise the ingenuity of the great godly king.
2. alodalotsele, singchen rgyalpoi stanga nang grospola stod .
Alodalotsele, praise the ingenuity and advice of the king, the great
lion.
3. stod nang stodna lei shellcam 'abrugumai mdzangspola stod .
When you prais , praise the learning of 'aBruguma, his crystal
wife.
4 . alodalotsele, shellcam 'abrugumai shes nang mdzangspola
stod .
Alodalotsele, praise the wisdom and learning of 'a Bruguma, bis
crystal wife.
TEXT NOTES
1 and 3. nang, in ; thus, if you praise in & praise; about rgyallham ,
see Kesarsage, notes 2 and 4. alodalotsele, lullaby. nang, within =
mixed = together – and.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
It is remarkable how well the intellectual capacities of man and
woman are characterised in this song : man as being productive, woman
88 reproductive.
III.
The Giant's Treasures.
bKur dman rgyalmos :
bKur-dman -rgyalmo 
says:
1. fungpai phushedna norbu chechung team 'adug.
How many treasures there are in the upper end of the valley !
lungpai phushedna norbu chechung tsam 'adug .
How many treasures there are in the upper end of the valley !
norbu chechebo sgola mi shongces yod lei.
The larger ones do not fit in the door.

432
4 . norbu chungchungbo pangla mi shongces yod let.
The smaller ones do not fit in the lap.
Dongrub kyls :
Dongrub says :
5. den 'adrai norbu buthsa ngarangla sal lei.
Such treasures give, please, to me (thy boy)!
6 . den 'adrai khyad norbu lagspal dongrubla sal lei.
Such treasures give, please, to good Dongrub !
7. alongthang ycigcig, buthsa ngarang ycigcig.
There is one solitary Alongplain : there is myself, one solitary boy!
8. alongthang ycigcig, lagepal dongrub ycigcig .
There is one solitary Alongplain : there is one solitary dear Dongrubi
9. buthsa ngarangla 'agrulbai 'agrullam cig sal lei.
Show me, thy boy, please, a way to walk along!
TEXT NOTES.
3, 4. The reiteration of che and chung is due to the metro. 5, 6.
The n of den is the initial silent 'a of 'adra, which is pronounced as a
nasal with the preceding syllable. 6, lagspa = legspa. 7, 8. along
thang = ring-plain . The mountains of Tibet and the Himalayas are
supposed to be the centre of the earth: the navel, these hills are
surrounded by a ring of plains. 5 , 6 , 9. sal = stsal, give, respectful.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
In the first part of the song the mother describes the treasures to
arouse Dongrub's covetouaneBS. Then Dongrub starts in search of
them and loses his way. In his difficulty he says the prayer, which
forms part 2. According to the Winter Myth the giant of the North
is in possession not only of a girl, but also of great transures. It is
remarkable that in the eyes of his beavenly mother Kyesar remains
always Dongrub.
IV .
Praise of 'a Bruguma.
1. blama bzangpos chos aalbas
As the good Lama taught (her) religion ,

433
2. ngai shescan lhamo cila men
Why should my wise goddess not be (wise) ?
3. blamas thamscad mkhyen mdzadpas
As the Lama made her know everything,
ngai mdzangecan 'a Bruguma cila men
Why should my learned 'a Bruguma not be (leamed) ?
5 . yari shes nang mdzangepo lel
Thy wisdom and learning
6. alam mdun nyad kunla ngonned lei
Is known to all, who are before thool
7. 'oma rigskyi mkb 'an 'agroma
Oh, thou milk -white fairy!
8. yari shes nang mdzangepo lei
Thy wisdom and learning
9. alam mdon ayad kunla thoa langssed lei
Is envied by all, who are before thee
10. 'oma rigskyi mkh 'an 'agroma
Oh, thou milk -white fairy !
TEXT NOTES.
2. men = ma yin, is not. 5. yari = yaranggi = nyidranggi, you,
thou. 6. alam , all, & Purig word. mdun nyad is perhaps mdun yad
yado, companion or people. 7. The » in mih'an is the nasally
pronounood 'a of 'agroma. 9. thoa langsces, rising of envy.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
Without doubting the historical character of Srong-btsan-agampo,
88 well as that of his two wives, I feel i nclined to believe that Bonpa
mythology has added some fresh colour to their characters. Srong.
btsan-agampo's two wives remind us of Kyesar's two wives, above
a regards their colour. 'aBruguma has lont hor colour to the
white Tård ; Bamza 'abumskyld , the wife, first of the Giant, then of
Kyesar, to the green Tår . There is another parallel (within the two
groupe ) as regards intellectual capacities. In both of them the husband
is famous for his ingenuity, the wives for their learning.

434
in this connection I wish to draw attention to the following: (1 )
In J.A .S.B ., Vol. LX , Part I, No. 3, 1891, Karl Marx, History of Ladakh,
p. 116 , noto 13, we read the following interesting statement: ' In the
Gyalrabs, Gesar ( = Keaar) is referred to as one of the suitors of Konggo,
the Chinese princess, who afterwards became the wife of Srong-blaan
agampa '.
(2) Grönwedel, Mythologie des Buddhismus, note on Abb. 116 ;
the crown of the green Tård often shows the Dhyånibuddha
Amoghasiddha. Amoghasiddha is the Tibetan Dongrub. Dongrub is
the name of Kesar whilst dwelling in the North . It was in the North,
whore Kosar married his second wife '.
The Almighty God-Father and God -Mother,
1. pbred de yzarpol 'ona rbab dela shortbabe rig 'adug
There is a means of escape from a rolling rock on a steep path,
2. phred ni yzarpoi rbabla shorthabe rig 'adug lel
Yes, there is a moans of escape from a rolling rock on a steep path .
3. yabchen ababal 'ona bk'a stealnas shorthabs rig med
But there is no means of escape from the commandments of the
Great Father.
4. 'abum khri rgyalpoi bk'a stealdas shorthabe rig med lei
There is no moans of escape from the commandments of the king
of the 100,000 thrones.
5. chu de chenmoi 'ona rabschenla bingthabs rig 'adug
Thom is no means of escape on the ford of the great waters.
6 . chu al chenmol rabschenla rgalthaba rig 'adug lo
Yes, there is a means of escape on the ford of the great waters.
10
7. yumchen amabal 'ona bk 'a stealnas shorthabs rig med
But there is no means of escape from the commandments of the
Great Mother.
8. 'abum khri rgyalmoi bk'a stsalnas shorthabs rig med let
There is no means of escape from the commandments of the queen
of the 100,000 thrones.

436
TEXT NOTE8.
3, 7. The concluding ba in ababai and amabai was added only for
the sake of the metre.
TRANALATION NOTRS.
This song shows that the originally physiologioal deities have booome
othical deities.
VI.
Kyesar, Returning to 'a Bruguma.
1. yeerri eranla aga batadde
nyemi chibs bauala chen led
Having saddled the golden steed ,
I will ride off to meet my friend.
dkarpoi glangpochela 
aga botnddo
Dyemol rta bauola chen lei
Having saddled the white oz,
I will ride off to meet my friend.
3. khra skya dkarmola brdzuste
nyemoi barbanla chen to
Being changed into a white faloon ,
I will go to the house of my friend.
yumal phoronla brdzuste
nyemoi rab yaalla chen lo
Being changed into a turquoise crow ,
I will go to the hall of my friend.
5. 
khyogthong md'a phangs rtsebabo
darung yod nang lel
The boys playing at Arrow-shooting,
Well, they are still here.
6 . dohela nachung zurri kha Idingmabo
darung da yod pang lel.
The girls, high on the edge of the roof,
They are st 11 here , hallo !

436
TEXT NOTES.
1. eran, a horse from Iran , Persia. 2. glangpoche, literally
"large ox ', is used nowadays for 'elephant'. In this connection it is
probably & 'riding Yak '. 3. barban, the inside of a house ; for lo soe
yserri buzhung. 4. Phoron - phorog, crow ; rab yaal, in Ladakhi
not a balcony, but a large fine hall. 5 , 6 . nang lei, a concluding
exclamation like lei and lo. 6 . dohela, hallo ! Idingmabo, means
originally ' goaring '.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
Kyesar is still undecided , in which of the four ways ne ought to
travel. The song proper is finished with v. 4 ; v. 5 and 6 are later addie
tions. They express the idea, that in spite of Buddhism and
Mohamedanism the Bon Religion is not yet oxtinguished and the Kyober
fostival is still in vogue. At this festival the girls watch the boys at
archery from the roofs of the houses.
VII.
Kyesar, a Voluntary Saviour.
1 . nono rang miyulla skyodpa rig dgossug lei.
The youngest son himself must go to the land of men .
2. bu dongrub rang miyulla skyodpa rig dgossug lei.
The son Dongrub himself must go to the land of men.
3. sngamoi thasangna ngatanggis byaphran rig rtse yio lo
In the early morning we will have a little tournament.
4. nyiyi sngasbar nang byapbran clg rtse yin lo
At the early rising of the sun we will have a little tournament.
55. rgyalla rig songna cila rig chen lo
If I should be victorious, why should I go ?
6 . ngatang phamse ring songaa mi cha nang kha med rig yên lo
If I am beaten, there is no sense in saying ' I will not go !'
7. ngatang rgyalces mannas pham mi shes lo .
But we do not know anything except being victorious: We do not
know what it is to be beaten !
8B

437
TEXT NOTES.
1. dgossug = dgos 'adug. 3. byaphran, a little deed , i.e. sham
fighting. 5. rgyalla = rgyalba, conquer. 6. phamse, probably pham
ste; khamed, no senso.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
This song refers to Kesarsage II. 36-42. The three sons of the king
of heaven have to fight each other. He who is beaten, must go to the
barth. Dongrub, the youngest, in spite of his being victorious, goes of his
own accord .
VIII.
'a Bruguma's Innocence.
1. ngazha rgyagar yulli mthong sheacan yin lo
om kyonang kyele
We know India from having seen it,
Om kyenang kyele !
2. agazha dpalbo yull nyan shescan yin lo
om kyenang kyele
We know Nepal from having hoard of it,
Om kyenang kyele !
3. ngazhas ma them menne gomparig mi shes
om kyenang kyele
We do not know a step further than the throshold ,
Om kyenang kyele !
4. ngazhas mazho rig menne thungba rig mi shes
om kyenang kyele
We do not know any beverage besides mother's milk ,
Om kyenang kyele !
5. sula phanba rig menne ynodpa rig co mi shes
om kyenang kyele.
We do not know of doing any harm , if it bo not for somebody's
advantage,
Om kyenang kyele !
TEXT 
NOTES.
The refrain of all verses 'om kyenang kyele was explained to me
to have been in the original om mkhyen 'ang mkhyen lei, which might

438
mean : Oh do take notice of thia! 3. ma them , the mother threshold ',
it is the one belonging to that part of the house, which is called makhang.
merne = mannas, besides.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
1. India is considered by some people to be 'aBruguma's father
land. In this case the history of Srong -btsan -agampo's wives may
bave influenced 'ABruguma's bistory. This song abould be placed before
'aBruguma's marriage to Kyesar. Some people place it after Kyosar'e
return from the north; but in that case thore would not be much left of
'a Bruguma's innocence , as she gave birth to two children by the king of
Yarkand 1
IX .
The King of Yarkand 's Entreaty for his Life .
1. ngatang gung yulla chen dola gling yulla chen .
Wo will go to the land of gling: holloa, wo will go to the land of
Llag !
2. dbyarla gling yulla balimo rig yod dola
rgyallham chenmo.
There it is oool in gummer: holloa,
great godly king!
3. dgunla ngati horyulla drosa rig yinpas
Because our land of Hor is warm in winter,
4. ngatang horyulla chen dola sprulpai rgyalpole
We will go them thon : holloa, incarnated king !
5. m 'as shespa rig songna nyldkyis bagsris
shig sname dola rgyallham chenmo
If you are very wise, you will accept a present:
hollos, great godly king!
6 . m 'a shespa dang m 'a mkhaspa songna nyldkyis
bagerls sbig mdzad 'ang mkhyenpai rgyalpo !
If you are very wise and very clover, you will
also give me a present, oh acknowledged king !

439
TEXT NOTES
3. drona, & warm place . 4 . le , respectful termination. 5 .
bagoris = bakhshish , gift ; ther in sris is never pronounood , and no reason
whatever can be given for this way of spelling the word . 6. mkhyen
is need very frequently to honour & person, for instance Sahib mkhyen . .
TRANSLATION NOTES.
Whon this song is sung by the king of Hor, Kyesar is kneeling on
his breast and ready to kill him . The king of Hor pretonds to be in
good spirits all the game, for which reason be repeatedly sings dola ,
holloa! He cannot yet give up telling lios, for in Hor it is not warm in
winter. Originally Hor sooms to have been Mongolia ; but now it is
generally supposed to be Yarkand. In ' the king of Hor offers his
hidden treasures, and the prosent, which he hopes to receive in exchange
of them , ia 6, is his life.

LADAKHI SONGS. 1
By THE REV. A. H . FRANCKE, Loh.
(With the aid of the Rev. 8. Ribbach and Dr. E . Shawe.)
Khalatsel gling glu rnams yin
THESE SONGS (i.o. Nos. XXI-XXIX ) ARE TAE GLING GLU ? Or
KHALATGE .
Song No. XXI.— Heavenly Voices.
1. amal bu zhung bitamapari dusla
When mother's little boy was born ,
2. mi yulbo 'oddis 'ang khyange
All the land of men was filled with light.
3. Thayi bu Kesar kun bltamg tsana
When Kesar and the (other) sons of the gods were born
4. 'adzambu gling 'oddis khyangs.
All 'a Džambugling was filled with light
5. rgyal Icang Icanggi Icang stodna
On the top of the willow of the world
6 . Iha phrug yaum skyod 'adug lei
There are walking three sons of the gods.
Iha skad cig diriri
There is # hum of heavenly voices.
8. rgyal lham chenmo kun skyod tsana
When all the great godly kings are walking
9. Iba skad cig diriri
There is a hum of heavenly voicos.
1 Koprinted from the Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXXI, 1902, pp. 304–311,
gLing glu ane the songs sung at the Spring or Kesar Festival, when everybody
practises archery. The glang glu of Khalatso and the gLing glu of Phyang may be
Qxofully compared . This song was included (ante, Vol. XXX, pp. 389 ff.) in ' A
Ladakhi Bonpo Hymnal'.

441
10. Thayi bu kesar kun akyod tsana
When Kesar and the (other) song of the gods are walking,
II. Tha akad cig diriri
There is a hum of heavenly voices.
12. rgyal Icang 1canggi Icang stodna
On the top of the willow of the world
13. Ihamo kun skyodded lei
There are walking three goddesses,
14. lha skad cig diriri
There is a hum of heavenly voices.
15. fojo 'abruguma skyod tsana
When the noble 'a Bruguma is walking,
16. lha skad cig diriri
There is a hum of heavenly voices.
shel Icam 'abruguma akyod tsana
When 'a Bruguma, the crystal wife, is walking,
18. lha skad cig diriri
There is a hum of heavenly voices.
TEXT NOTES.
1. bitamspari, for participles ending in pari, compare Song
No. XVII, Note on 6 . 2. 4 . khyanga; just as khyabpa was derived from
'agebepa, khyangpa was derived from 'agengspa. 3. kun, for kun , in
the sense of 'and so on ', compare ante, 'Spring Myth of the Kesar Saga ',
Philological Notes, No, VI. 19. 5. rgyal Icang, originally probably rgya.
Icang, the willow with far-spreading (branches). The prefixed I of the
second syllable was founded with the first. It is the tree of the world ,
mentioned in Ladakhi Wedding Ritual, Songs Nos. V , VI, VII, and
VIII. 8. rgyallham , for the addition of final m , compare ante, 'Spring
Myth of the Kesar Saga ', Philological Notes, No. V. 1. 13. shyodded =
skyoddad, seo Ladakhi Grammar, present tenses.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
If I am not altogether mistaken, this hymn contains an explanation
of the phenomenon of thunder. It is thought to be caused by the
Walking of the gods. The word lhaskad, which I translated by 'heavenly

voiome ', may be taken for any wound, caused by the moutha, bande or
feet of the gods. The idea of thunder is not so very far-fetched, if we
consider that, 80oording to Song No. XXIX , lightning is oallod 'Komar's
sword', and that the word dinini may bave boon originally Iiriri, which
is used to express the rolling of thunder.
Song No. XXII. -Dedication of the Arrows.
1. thangka bdemoi kha mdå shing legamo rig yod .
On the boautiful plain there is a fine arrow -tree,
2. tbang de bdemol kha mdā bhing legsmo rig yod.
On that beautiful plain there is a fine aitow -tree.
3. mda ahing ringmobo agui mdå sbing zhig yin lo
The long arrow-Bhaft is an arrow-shaft of the Ague.
dezuggi mdå shingbo agubai lagtu phul
Such arrow-shafts offer to the hands of the Agus !
5. dezuggi mdà shingbo agu drungbabai lagtu phul lel
Such arrow -shafts offer to the hands of those who are before
the Agus!
6. md shin chun chungbo jojobal phang sinh lý và
The short Arrow -shaft is a spindlo-stick of the ladies
7. dezuggi phang shlagbo aneyi lag de la phul
Such spindle-sticks offer to the bands of the wife of the
heavenly king)!
8. dezuggi phang shingbo ane bkur dmantot lag de la
phul lei
Such spindle-sticks offer to the hands of Ane bKurdmanmo !
TEXT NOTES.
5, 6, 7 the syllable ba in agubai, drungbabai, jojobas was inserted
only for the sake of singing. 7. jojo, the reiterated form , is always
und with the feminino, jo with the masculine.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
All the arrow , wed at the Korar Festival, are to be considered as
being dedicated , the longer ones to the Agus, the shorter ones to the
heavenly queen Ane bKurdmanmo.

443
Song No. XXIII.-- Kesar's Four Victorie .
1. buthsa agarangngi dgung lo brgyadpol Dangdu
abar ande bandhe yaum btulpa yin
buthea de kunni kha 'agying 'agying rig 'agylagape yin
When I, a boy, had reached my eighth year,
I subdued the three Andebandhes of the East.
The boy has been triumphing over all of them .
buthsa ngarangngi dgung lo bcu ynyiapal nangdu
rl rgyal blon chen kun btulpa yin .
buthsa de kunni kha 'agging 'agying rig 'agylagapa yin .
When I, a boy, had reached my twolfth year,
I subdued all the great ministers of the hills.
The boy has been triumphing over all of them .
3. buthsa ngarangngi dgung lo bcu drugpai nangdu
bdud khyabpa lagring kun btulpa yin
buthsa de kunni kha 'agying 'agying rig 'agylngapa yin
When I, a boy, had reached my sixteenth year,
I subdued the devil Khyabpa lagring and his men.
The boy has been triumphing over all of them .
buthsa ngarangngi dgung lo bco brgyadpai nangdu
hor ngan kun btulpa yin
buthsa de kunni kha 'agying 'agying rig 'agyingspa yin .
When I, a boy, had reached my eighteenth year,
1 subdued all the bad Yårkandis.
The boy has been triumphing over all of them .
TEXT NOTES.
1. For the Andebandhes of the East, compare Kear Saga No. V .
1- 8. There we have seven of them . 2. Kun , compare Noto No. 1. 3.
3. Khyabpa lagring means 'coverer longhand'. This is perhaps another
name of Agu Za in Kesar Saga No. III.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
In this song we have probably the four victories, which were
prophesied in the Spring Myth of the KoBar Saga ', No. V . 11-16.

444
Instead of the word 'Yårkandís' in 4 'Mongolians' may be said , compare
Jäschke's Dictionary.
Song No. XXIV. - Kesar and the Mules.
1. buthua ngai ngosla ngon đang we arezha khampa
Oh, you brown mules, listen to me, to a boy !
2. buthsa ngai bdagla ysan dang wa drezba khampa
Oh, you brown mules, please, listen to me, to a boy.
3. rtsvakha nang gar bzangpo za chogpa 'adug
There is quite enough of good pasture ;
4. drezha khampa khung khungbo cila bco 'ad lei
Oh, you brown mules, why are you crying khung khung ?
5. chu mig gar bzangpo 'athung chogces 'adug
There is quite enough of good wells:
6. drezha khampa khung khungbo cila bco 'ad lei
Oh, you brown mules, why are you crying khung khung ?
7. sa ljab bdemoi kha 'adug cbogees yod
You have been (long) enough on good pasture ;
8. drezha khampa khung khungbo cila bco 'ad lei
Oh, you brown mulos, why are you crying khung khung ?
TEXT NOTES.
4, 6, 8. Khung khung imitates the voice of the mules, bo is the
emphatic article. 7. saljab, means the name as sucha, pasture ground.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
This song is to be placed after Kesar's roburn from Hor. Thon
he found that the mules had taken the King of Hor's part. It is almost
certain that the word 'adre, & cortain spirit, was mixed up with the
word dre, mule, and thus the original spirits became animals.
Song No, XXV.- On the Srar Pass.
1. srargyi lai stengna thang dkar mgo akar kun chadde luste
'adug
ane bkur dman rgyalmos ngala rogs shig mdzad .

445
On the Srar Pass the strength of the White-headed falcon is broken,
and he remains behind !
Oh, queen Ane bKurdmanmo, come to my help !
srargyi lai atengna phorog nag chung kun chadde luste 'adug
ane bkur dman rgyalmos ngala rogs shig mdzad
On the Srar Pass the strength of all the little black crows is broken,
and they remain behind.
Oh, queen Ane bKurdmanmo, come to my help !
3. srargyi lai stengna yyuma phoron kun chadde luste 'adug
ane bkur dman rgyalmos ngala rogs shig mdzad.
On the Srar Pass the strength of all the turquoise pigeons is broken,
and they remain behind !
Oh, queen Ane bKurdmanno, come to my help !
srargyi lal stengaa shangku mjug zlum kun chadde luste 'adug
ane bkur dman rgyalmos ngala rogs shig mdzad
On the Srar Pass the strength of all the bushy-tailed wolves is broken,
and they remain behind .
Oh, queen Ane burdmanmo, come to my help !
srargyi lal stengna sragpa cundru kun chadde luste 'adug
ane bkur dman rgyalmos ngala rogs shig mdzad.
On the Srar Pass the strength of all the warless stone-partridges is
broken , and they remain behind.
Oh, queen Ano bKurdmanmo, come to my help !
TEXT NOTES.
chadde, in all the verses, means originally 'is cut off'. fogs = grogs,
Lad. Gr. Laws of Sound 3. 3. phoron = phugron, pigeon . 4. shangku
= scangku - spyangku, Lad. Gr. l. of s. 1; 5, cundru, earless, derivation
not known.
TRANSLATION NOTES,
This song is a prayer rendered by Kesar, which he addressed to the
queen of the gods, when crossing the difficult Srar Pass. This page ho
had to croes on his journey to the North.

446
Song No. XXVI.— Kesar, Returning to 'a Bruguma.
rdzuste
yyuma phoronla 
ynam stod mthonpola 'agyingba chana
khra akya d karpola rdzuste
vyuma phoronni sna skytlla chen lei.
If she, taking the shape of a turquoise dove,
Should go to soar in the highest skies,
I, taking the shape of a white falcon ,
Will go to take her home again .
rdzuste
yyuma phoronla 
shorna
dgung stod mthonpola 
khra skya dkarpola rdzuste
vyuma phoronla 'adedpa chen lei.
If she, taking the shapo of a turquoise dove,
Should go to flee into the highest zopith,
I, taking the shape of a white faloon ,
Will go to follow after her.
ayamo yser migla rdzuste
mthso stod mthonpola 'agyingba chana
chu sram kamala rdzuste
nyamo yaer miggi ena okyllla cheh let.
If she, taking the shapo of the fish 'goldeye ',
Should go to float in the deepest obian,
otter,
I, taking the shape of a whitebreasted 
Will go to take her home again.
nyamo yser migla rdzuste
mthso rgyan mthongpola sborna
chu sram brang dkarla rdzuste
nyamo yaer migla 'adedla chen lei.
If sbe, taking the shape of the fish 'goldeye',
Should go to flee into the wildest ocean ,
I, taking the shape of a whitebroasted otter,
Will go to follow after her.
TEXT NOTES.
1. phoron = phugron, dove; ma skyil, literally 'hinder the nose ,
1.6., 'meet from the front'. 3. Kama, said to mean the same as brang

447
dkar, whitebroasted. 4. rgyan = rgya, wide. Lad. Grammar, lays of
Sound 6.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
Kesar, after having taken the food and drink of forgetfulness, had
forgotten 'a Brugums. Now , that the birds, coming from the South,
brought him a message from her, decides to win her again by all means;
actually there was no need to use the transformations mentioned in
the above song.
Song No. XXVII.- -'aBruguma's Farewell to Kesar.
me ma khrulli Kesar !
Kesar, who never lettest the fire fall!
1. Stangscanni rgyalpo nyerang
steng nang lha yulla skyod zana
Iha yalli Thamo kun mthongse
mi yulu jojo ning rjed ma rjed.
Oh, my clover King!
When thou wilt go to the upper land of the gods,
And seest all the fairies of heaven,
Then do not forget thy wife from the land of men,
stangacanni jo nyerang
steng nang Iba yulla skyod zana
Thamo nang sitarräm kun mthongse
mi yulli 'abruguma 'aphang ma 'aphang.
Oh, my clever Lord !
When thou wilt go to the upper land of gods,
And seest all the Sitarråms among the fairies,
Then do not reject 'a Bruguma from the land of men.
3. stangecanni rgyalpo nyerang
yog nang klu yulla skyod zana
klu 
yulli klumo kun mthongse
mi yulli jojo ning rjed ma rjed.
Oh, my clever King!
When thou wilt go to the lower land of the snakes,
And seest all the Nägini of it,
Then do not forget thy wife from the land of men.

448
4. stangscanni jo nyerang
yog nang klu yulla skyod zana
klu yulli klumo kun mthongse
mi yulli grogs skal 'aphang ma 'aphang .
Oh, my clever Lord !
When thou wilt go to the lower land of the snakes,
And seost all the Nagină of it,
Then do not forget thy helpmate from the land of men.
TEXT NOTES.
1. stangscan means 'olovor in strategies'; zana = toana, when ;
thongse mthongste, seeing. 2. (sitarrām sooms to be a reference
to Sitā and Rama the heroine and hero of the Ramaydna, looked upon
as a fairy', the combination of the male and female names of allied
deities which is common enough in India , being regarded as & single
name.)
TRANSLATION NOTES.
Ay the Kosar Myth tells us, Kosar forgot 'a Bruguma all the same,
after having taken the food and drink of forgetfulness.
Song No. XXVIII.— Young Kesar.
1. la khala yaspabo
lagsmobal mentog cig yassed lei.
A flower, blooming on the pass,
Oh, a pure flower is in bloom !
2. la stod nang mthonpo kunla
yzugscanni mentog cig yassed lei.
On all the high passos
A flower of fine shape is in bloom !
3. darung yaspai sgang zhig yod lei
sngamo yaspai mentoggi jo .
Thou art but half opened ,
Oh Lord (who art) like a flower of the morning !

449
darung yaspai sgang zhig yod let
kallmānni mentoggi jo
Thou art but half opened,
Oh Lord (who art) like a kalimin flower!
TEXT 
NOTES.
3 and 4 may be translated just as well 'Oh Lord of the flower of
the morning; oh Lord of the kaliman flower'. The kalimän flower is
not of a beautiful appearance, but has a very sweet acont.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
This song refors to the supposod spring hero, who has carried spring
up to the high passes. All the same he has not yet displayed his full
glory (the flower is only half opened ).
Song No. XXIX . — Kesar, the God of Lightning
saricanni la mgona
nagpoi sprin cig yongaged lei.
On the height of the Sarican Pass
Black clouds are gathering,
saricanni la mgona
dum dum sprin cig yongnged lei.
On the height of the Sarican Pass
Torn clouds are gathering.
3. nagpo sprinpoi dkyil dena
jo lagsmoi snamralla glog 'abarred lei.
In the middle of the black clouds
Lightning flashes from our good Lord's sword .
4.
 nagpo sprinpoi dkyllpona
rgyal Iham kegarri gnamralla glog 'abarred lei.
In the middle of the black clouds
Lightning flashes from the godly King Kosar's sword .
TEXT 
NOTES.
3, 4. Enamral, respectful for nalgri, eword.

450
TRANSLATION NOTES.
This song furnishes us with one of the strongest arguments to prove
Kesar's nature-origin ,
Song No. XXX.- The Nyopa's Carpet : A Wedding Song.
A . – Nangmas :
PEOPLE OF THE HOUSE AŞK :
6. sa 'og phon che de
1. nam stod mthonpo de
su dang ganggi stan , su dang ganggi stan.
The wide earth,
The high sky,
Whose and what carpet is it ? Whose and what carpet is it ?
kbrom zed kha sngon de
2. gangs stod mthonpo de
su dang ganggi stan.
eu dang ganggi stan .
The blue-bordered saddle
The high glacier,
cloth ,
Whose and what carpet is it ?
Whose and what carpet is it ?
3. brag stod mthonpo de 8 sha stan sebo de
su dang ganggi stan . su dang ganggi stan .
The high rock, The grey deer-skin,
Whose and what carpet is it ? 
Whose and what carpet is it ?
9. rtsva shing nags thsal de
mthsom stod mthonpo de
su dang ganggi stan.
su dang ganggi stan.
Those meadows and woods,
The high ocean,
Whose and what carpet is it ?
Whose and what carpet is it ?
10. snambu yug ring de
5. mkhar stod mthonpo de su dang ganggi stan .
su dang ganggi stan . That long piece of woollen
The high castle, cloth ,
Whose and what carpet is it ? Whose and what carpet is it ?
B.--Nyopas :
THE NYOPAS SAY :
nam stod mthonpo de 2. gangs stod mthonpo de
nyi zla ynyiskai stan. sengge yyu ralli stan.
The high sky The high glacier
Is the carpet of sun and Is the carpot of the lion with
the turquoise mane.
moon.

451
3. brag stod mthonpo de 
khrom zed kha sngon de
skyin chen ba rganni stan . 
agudpallei stan.
Tho high rock The blue-bordered saddle
Is the carpet of the mountain cloth
goat, the old ox, Is tho carpot of Agu dPalle .
8. sha stan sebo de
mthsom stod mthonpo de
agu khru btungngi stan .
nyamo yser miggi stan .
The grey deer-skin
The high ocean
Is the carpet of Agu Khru
Is the carpet of the fish
btung
'golden eye'.
9. rtsva shing nags thsal de
bya darg bylgui stan .
5 . mkhar stod mthonpo de
Those meadows and woode
mi chen gong mai stan ,
Are the carpet of the great
The high castle
and little birds.
La the carpet of great men .
10. snambu yug ring de
6. sa 'og phol che de 
nyo 'am spun bdunni stan .
rgya nag rgyalpoi stan . That long piece of woollen
The wide earth cloth
Is the carpet of the King of 
Is the carpet of the Nyopas
China. the seven brethren .
TEXT NOTES.
A . 4. mthsom = mthso , lake. 6. phonche or pholche, much , in
this connection 'much land '. 7. khrom zed = thromme zed, glittering
brush ', used for velvet. 10. yug means 'not sown', I am told ; thus
'a long woven piece of cloth '.
B. 3. ba rgan, old ox; compare Song No. XV. 29. 8. Agu Khru
htung (the spelling of the name is doubtful) has not a human , but a
falcon 's head.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
This song shows clearly the general character of the wedding songs.
It is not in diroct connection with the rest of the wedding songs, but
forms a goene by itself. After the Nyopas (lit., 'buyers' of the bride)
have entered the house, they are not allowed to sit down on a carpet,
until they have answered the questions, which form the first half of this
song. (This custom seems to be allied to the world -wide 'impossible

452
riddle ' of Folklore, which is a variant of the idea of the impossible task '
As & supernatural method of identifying of the expected hero . The
root idea here would seem to be that the Nyopas have to prove that they
really are Nyopas before being received, and the proof is in the Folklore
method of answering certain formal riddles, as one of the 'signs' of the
coming hero.- -Editor, Indian Antiquary .)

( 5 ]
THE LADAKHI PRE-BUDDHIST MARRIAGE RITUAL.1
(Translation and Notes.)
By A . H . FRANCKE, Ladakh .
Some time ago I published in Mémoires de la Société Finno-ougrienne,
Helsingfors, some translations in German of folktales and of extracte
from a Tibetan MS. relating to the Kesar -Myths of Western Tibet.
The publication of the Marriage Songs of the Ladakhis now under
taken is another step in the same direction. My object in these publica
tions is to present means to the scientific world for unveiling the hitherto
hidden treasures of the Pre -Buddhist Religion of Tibet. I was
fortunate indeed to get hold of these wedding gonga, just before they
had vanished altogether. In Central and Upper Ladakh only mere
reminiscences, are left of them , although the gorgeous dress of the Nyopas
iind the scene before the house are still in vogue. In Lower Ladakh the
Hongs have been preserved much better, but a large portion of them have
ceared to be intelligible to the people . Thus whilst the first nine of
the songs I collected were, certain passages excepted, generally under.
stood by the ordinary man, the latter half of the collection consists more
or less of a succession of unintelligible sounds. The reason may be,
that the wedding ritual proved too hard a trial on the patience of the
party and was cut short in many cases.
The method of reading has been as follows. All the songs were
dictated slowly by the leader of the Nyopas to the village Munshi of
Khalatse, Yeshes Rig 'adzin , who wrote them down according to the
actual sound. This copy proved to be very useful as far as Yoshes
Rig 'adzin himself had understood the words. For disentangling the
more obscure passages, however, the assistance of the mission school.
master of Leh , Shamuel aByorldan , and of other Ladakhis, possessed
of commonsense, had to be requisitioned. In this way, the first half of
the collection bas become fairly intelligible, whilst the latter half is still
full of obscure passages.
Reprinted from the Indian Antiquary, XXX, 1901, pp. 131- 149.
I )

464
It is necessary for the proper comprehension of these songs to
direct the attention of the readers to the fact that the four points of
the compass play a rather important role in the wedding songs, as
well as in other Pre-Buddhist literature (vide Ladakhi Songs No. XV).
This is very natural, for as has been pointed out in the paper on the Kesar
Myths, the Pre-Buddhist Religion must have been a system of Sun
and Nature Worship . Now it is the sun , who creates the four points
of the compass. All of thenı are different manifestations of the sun and
hence the importance attached to them in a physiological religion. This
fact suggests a solution to the difficult problem of explaining the ancient
mystic emblem of the Bon Religion, vyungdrung 15 . This emblem
was in my view invented to represent the sun as the creator of East,
South , West and North, the little mark at the end of oach line indicating
the inclination of the sun to proceed from one point to the other.
It is not an oasy matter to give a satisfactory explanation of the
word yyungdrung, but I dare to offer one, in favour of which there is
at loast some probability. In the Kesar Myths an old name of the Sun,
bya Khyung dkrung nyima, occurs. This means literally “the bird
Khyung, the disc, the sun '. In course of time the name Khyung dkrung
may have degeneratod to become yyungdrung, especially at a time when
the idea of the emblem had ceased to be generally understood . Lawn of
Bound cannot be of much avail here, because we are dealing with a proper
noun. A few suggestions, however, might be made in favour of this
derivation :- (1) a word vyung is absolutely non -existing and cannot be
found in any dictionary; (2) there exist a few cases of k being dropped
when preceding y, thus kyang = yang, kyi = yi, kyin = yin ; (3 ) there
is only a very slight, hardly perceptible, difference in the pronunciation
of dkrung and drung. Of course, this explanation of the emblem rests
on the theory, that it is always the same sun, which appears in the
East every morning, and is in opposition to tho, theory shown in Song
No. I. B . 7, post, p. 135. However, the study of other physiological
religions nas proved plainly that the most contradictory theories may
dwell in them side by side.
While on the point of derivation ; in regard to the change from
khyung to yyung, it may be compared also to the following corresponding
words in Jäschke's Tibetan Dictionary: khyabpa-yabpa, both 'cover '
in Ladakhi; 'akhyarba -yarba, both 'go astray '; 'akhyampa -yamyom ,
both 'be unsteady'; akhyigspa, 'to fetter'; vyigspa, 'to be hindered';
akhyurba, 'to be separated '; yurba or yurma, pull out' (weeds, etc.);
. 10B

455
'akhyompa, 'to wave'; yompa, 'be swinging', swing. The y of yyung
and yyigapa is a silent prefixed letter and is often omitted in writing,
In the figures a and b below is shown the yyungdrung in both positions:
the natural and the reversed. The Rer. A . W . Heyde of Ghoom tells
me that the vyung rung as a monogram is said to be composed of the
two syllables e su and Ali, suli = srasti.
According to Waddell, Lamuism in T'ibet, both the established
Buddhist church and the adherents to the Bon Religion have a vyungdrung
of their own, the one under a being the emblem of Lamaism , that under
b of the Bon Religion. It is most natural that a alone should correspond
to the actual course of the sun, for it is probably the older one. Indian
Buddhist missionaries may have fought in vain against the use of the
symbol, and finally agreed to introduce it into their own system by
Togarding it as a monogram , containing the three syllables su asti in
Indian characters. Afterwards in opposition to Buddhism and at a
time when the leading ideas of the once physiological religion bad vanished,
Bon priests made the emblem turn the other way: just as the custom of
circumambulation was altered by the Bonpas from right to left.
ASU) 94721
In the above drawings 
showing the 
yyungdrung as an ornament
in Native houses in Khalatse, Lower Ladakh, it will be seen turned both
ways.

458
However all this may really be, on the whole I feel obliged to say,
that my explanation of the yyungdrung must not be taken for more
than a more guess at its interpretation from a Tibetan point of view .
I have no moans in this remote land of collating these speculations with
the mass of literature on the svastika.
The yyungdrung is thought to be of great importance at the
wedding ceremony, and both bride and bridegroom have to sit on
carpete showing the emblem . It is indeed in universal use in this con
nection, for in a copy of the wedding songa, which I received a few days
ago from Ph yang the yyungdrung is used for punctuation instead of the
full stop.
Song No. 1.1
bagma btangteana nyopas sgola btangcessi glu 'i2 dpecha yin .
This is the book of the songs, which are sung at the door by the Nyopas,
when the bride is given .
om bkraahlspar gyurcig , bkrashis bdeblags dang idanpar
Byurcig .
oangmas btang 'adug.
Om , may you be blessed ! May the blessing come unto you speedily !
The people of the house say:
A .
I. A . 1. duba sngonmo destengdu rgyugpa ci'i don .
That blue smoke, Rising upwards, what does it mean ?
2 . duba engonmo de bardu rgyugpa ci'i don .
The blue smoke, Hanging over the ground, what does
it mean ?
duba engonmo de togtu rgyugpa ci'i don .
The blue smoke, Falling to the ground, what does it
mean ?
duba sngonmo de sharla rgyugpa ci'i don .
The blue smoke, Spreading towards East, what does it
mean ?
1 The orthography of the songs has been brought in accordance with that of
Ladakhi letter writing. In all doubtful cases, however, the spelling of the first
MS. will be given .
? A chungba ie indicated by an apostrophe.

457
5. duba sngonmo de Thoru rgyugpa ci'i don .
Spreading towards South, what does
The blue smoke,
it mean ?
6. duba engonmo de byangdu rgyugpa ci'i don .
Spreaching towards Vorth , what does
The blue smoke,
it 11tta11 ?
duba sngonmo de nubtu rgyugpa ci'i don .
Spreading towards West, what does
The blue smoke,
it mean ?
mkhardu rgyugpa ci'i don.
8. duba engonmo de
Rising to the custle. what toes it
The blue smoke,
mean !
9. duba sngonmo de yulla rgyugpa ci'i don .
Spreading over the country. whunt
The blue smoke,
does it mean ?
grongdu rgyugpa ci'i don .
10 . duba sngonmo de
Spreading over the village, what does
The blue smoke,
it mean !
I. B . phyimas landu.
People outside (the Nyopas) answer:
duba ongonmo de stengdu rgyugpa de
Ihai dbangpo rgya bzhinla rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba'i don .
Rison upwards,
The blue smoke 
I think, that the Lord of Heaven, dBangpo rgyabzhin 's
anger may not be provoked,
It is an offering to him .
2. duba engonmo de bardu rgyugpa de
btsan ama skyabs bdunla rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba't don .
The blue smoke is hanging over the earth ,
Skyabsbdun's anger may not
I think, that the Earth-Mother 
be provoked,
It is an offering to her.

458
3. duba sngonma de fogtu rgyugpa de
klurgyal Icogpola rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba 'i don .
The blue smoke I s falling to the ground,
I think, that the Water-King 1Cogpo's anger may not be
provoked,
It is an offering to him .
duba sngonmo de shardu rgyugpa de
shar rdorje sems dp'ala rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba 'i don ,
The blue smoke is spreading towards East,
I think, that the eastern rDorje sems dp'a's anger may not
be provoked,
It is an offering to him .
5. duba sngonmo de Thoru rgyugpa de
Iho rinchen byung ldanla rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba'i don.
The blue smoke Is spreading towards South,
I think, that the southern Rinchen byungidan's anger may
not be provoked ,
It is an offering to him .
duba sngonmo de byangdu rgyugpa de
byang donyod grubpala rgolb ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba'i don.
The blue smoke Is spreading towards North,
I think, that the northern Donyodgrubpa's anger may not be
provoked,
It is an offering to him .
duba sngonmo de nubtu rgyugpa de
nub snangba mth 'ayasla rgolba ma zhug sam
bsang shug phulba 'i don .
The blue smoky Is spreading towards West,
I think, that the western 
sNangba mthyas' anger may not
be provoked,
It is an offering to him .

459
8 . duba sngonmo de mkhardu rgyugpa de
rtselha snyanpola rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba 't don .
The blue smoke Is rising to the castle,
I think, that rTselha snyanpo's anger may not be provoked,
It is an offering to him ,
9. duba sngonmo de yulla rgyugpa de
yulthsa snyanpola rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba 'i don .
The blue smoke Is spreading over the country.
I think, that Yulthsa snyanpo's anger may not be prveket,
It is an offering to him .
10 . duba sngonmo de grongla rgyugpa de
phalha snyanpola rgolba ma zhus sam
bsang shug phulba 'i don .
The blue smoke Is spreading over the peasant ' (hones),
I think , that Phalha snyanpo's anger may not be provokeil.
It is an offering to him .
NOTES ON THE TIBETAN TEXT.
Nyopa, buyer, because the bride was bonylt in ancient times,
The salutation in classical language Om bkrashispar, xtr., is exchangol
After each strophe, but will not be repeated in these pages.
1. A . In all verses ci'i don means literallv: it is the meaning of
what ? II. B . As regarıls the meaning of names and general position
of the heads of the Pre-Buddhist cosmology, nee my paper on the Krusar
Myth in Mémoires de la Société Finno-ongrienne, 19001, So. 11. Til
syHable sam I was first inclined to translate by 'or', but people toll
me, that they understood it to mean 'think , in favour of which might be
pointed to the people's response: Woll thought, you nighty friends .
In v. 4, 5, 6, and 7 the gous, who govor the four directions, aru
mentioned.
They are the properly Tibetan Loka-prīlcs. In Lamaism three of
them have become Dhyanibuddhas, whilst Dorje seme dp'a has become
tbeir president. That their relationship to the four points of the globe
has not yet quite been lost in Lamaism , is shown by the Pudmathanyig,
Bee Grünwedel, Mythologie des Buddhismus, pp. 98, 99.

460
The names in literal translation mean :
4. " The thunderbolt with the courageous soul.' 5 . "The 
producer
of great price.' 6. Fulfiller of the aim , he bas.' 7. 'Eternal light.'
With the exception of 6, all the names point plainly to the different
manifestations of the sun. 7 in particular goes back to the idea,
that the West is the receptacle of all the suns, which have been 
imported
from Porsia. Instead of ma zhus the original rendering was probably
ma zhu, the imperative being used for the optative. 8 . rT'selha, goal
of the summit. 9. Yultha, village idol. 10, Phalha, god of the
fathers, i.e. family.
NOTES ON THE TRANSLATION.
It might be well to say a few words about the scene, which forms
the background of the songs. The Nyopas (i.a . friends of the bride
groom , who were sent to buy the bride) come on horseback and clar!
in gorgeous dress 1 before the house of the bride and ask for entrance.
This is refused to them unless they are able to answer certain
questions. All the people of the house are armed with sticks and
the Nyopas are beaten unmercifully as soon as they fail to prove their
respectable origin by answering the questions satisfactorily. The
people of the house light a fire of the wood of the pencil cedar and con
cerning the smoke of this the first questions are asked .
After the questions regarding the principal deities have been settled,
in 8, 9, and 10 the local deities come in . Though in ancient times idols
do not seem to have had a place in the Bon Religion , we can see how
the idea gradually crept in . As we know from the Kesar Myths, the
Iha 's or gods used to visit the earth frequently. High hills became known
as places of the gods' descent, and to honour them properly , white
altars were erecteci. By and by these altars or Thatho's were considered
as being the dwelling places of certain lha's and at last the idea was deve
loped, that wherever a lhatho was erected, a lha would soon take his seat.
So we have a lha on the hill (near the castle) in 8, and the family (father )
Tha in 10. In 9 the word thsa might point to a rough idol ; compare
Jäschke's Dictionary, th sathsa. All of them have the epithet snyanpo
= 'well-sounding ;
. ! With the article as published orginally in the Indian Antiquary there is a
coloured plate, facing p. 138 (IA ., XXX, 1901), in whimb the dross of the Nyopan
is depicted.

461
Song No. II.
A .
II. A . legs bsams dbangi nyebo Woll thought, you mighty friends,
nangmas. People of the house say:
Look over there to the upper
1. phuru yar yzigs 'ang 
valley !
That white glacier water,
gangs chu dkarpo de
su dang ganggi chang. What and whose beor is it ?
Look over there to the right!
2 . yyasla yar yzigs 'ang 
yy'a chu khral khrol de That foaming water among the
stones.
What and whose beer is it ?
su dang ganggi chang. 
3. mdoru yar yzigs 'ang Look over there below !
ytsang chab sngonmo de That blio river water,
su dang ganggi chang. What and whose kor is it !
vyonla yar yzigs 'ang Look over there to the left!
chumig kyal kyll de Those wolls here and there,
su dang ganggi chang, What and whose beer are they !
5. ebrulmgo ma chabrkyan And in this large jar with the
nangdu snake's head
yang dkar naskyi chang su The beer (made) of white lrley.
dang ganggi chang. What and whose byr is this ?
B .
Nyopas landu. The Vyopris uzsWer:
II. B. 1. phuru yar yzigs 'ang
gangs chu dkarpo de
dar sing ysoba'i chang.
Look over there to the upper valley !
That white glacier water
Is the beer, nourishing the ice-lion
2. yyasla yar yzigs 'ang
yy'a chu khral khrol de
shaphran ysoba'i chang.

462
Look over there to the right !
That foaming water among the stones
Is the beer, nourishing the young deer.
3 . mdoru yar yzigs 'ang
ytsang chab angonmo de
nyaphran ysoba'i chang.
Look over there below !
That blue river water
Is the beer, nourishing the little fishes,
3. yyonla yar yzigs 'ang
chumig kyal kyll de
ma zhing ysoba'i chang .
Look over there to the left!
Those wells here and there
Are the beer, nourishing the mother-fields.
5. sbrulmgo ma chab rkyanla
yang dkar naskyi khuba de
nyo 'am spun bdvngyi chang.
And in this large jar with the snake's head ,
The fluid (mado) of white barley
Is the beer of the Nyopas or the seven brethren .
TEXT NOTES.
A . 2. yyachu, this word is used here, so people tell me, for water
with stones, not for stagnant water, khralkhrol, noisy. 4 . kyal- yil
Acattered about. 5. ma, mother, used for everything large, here the
largo jar.
B. 4. ma xhing, motherfield , a very fortile field. Instead of
kyaikyil-parpur is also used in the same sense.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
1 . 5. The mouth of the jar is formed like a snake's head. B. I.
The ice-lion with the blue locks (or mane) was originally the glacier
itself, later on it developed into a fabulous being, which was thought to
live there. 5. The number of the Nyopas ought to be seven .

463
Song No. II).
A .
III. A . enyan yeanpar mdzodcig .
Now listen with your ears!
dgung dang dbyibs kyi mjalthsul de
su dang ganggis byas.
The existence of the high heaven and of the forms (plants,
animals),
By whom and how was it created ?
2 . shar dang nubkyi mjalthsul de
su dang ganggis byas.
The existence of East and West,
By whom and how was it created ?
3, lho dang byanggi mjalthsul de
Bu dang ganggis byas.
The existence of South and North .
By whom and how was it created ?
steng dang 'oggi mjalthsul de
su dang ganggis byas.
The existence of height and depth,
By whom and how was it created ?
phu dang mºoyi mjalthoul de
gu dang ganggis byas.
The existence of an upper and a lower valley,
By whom and how was it created ?
mkhar dang yulgyi mjalthsul de
su dang ganggis byas.
The existence of castle and village,
By whom and how was it created ?
7. yzhis dang ynaskyi mjalthsul de
su dang ganggis byas.
The existence of hearth and home,
By whom and how was it created !
8. phyi dang nanggi mjalthsul de
su dang ganggis byas.
The fact, that some people are outside and some inside,
By whom and how way it created ?

464
B ,
phyimas landu.
The Sympus answer :
III. B . 1. dgung dang dbyibskyi mjalthsul de
nyi zla ynyiskyis byas.
The existence of the high heaven and of the forms
Was created by sun and moon.
2 . shar dang nubkyi mjalthsul de
khri ydugs nyimas byas.
Tle existence of East and West
Wis (reated by the sun the umbrella of the throne.
3. Iho dang byanggi mjalthsul de
zla mthsan dkarpos byas.
The existence of South and North
Was created by the Moon , the whitener of the night.
te
4 .
 steng dang 'oggi mjalthsul de
sbang char zilbus byas.
Tho existence of height and depth
Was created by the dewy soaking rain.
5, phu dang mdoy mjalthoul de
skyeser 1 rlungpos byas.
The existence of an upper and a lower valley
Was created by skyeser, the wind.
6 . mkhar dang yulgyi mjalthsul de
rgyal dang blongyls byas.
The existence of castle and village
Was created by the king and the ministers.
1 Having been questioned meanwhile by Regierungsrat Dr. E. Schlagintweit
about the equation Kesar = skyegsar, I wish to state the following facts: This
equation is not worked out by myself, but received ready made from the natives,
who explain the name in this way. According to a letter from Rev. Fr. Peter,
Kyelang, the popular pronunciation of the same name is Kyesar in Lahoul. In a
collection of popular songs which I received from Phyang three days ago, the king's
name is invariably spelled Kyear. In Leh ordinary people pronounce the name
Kesar, but educated people, who know the myths from the epox, pronounce it Gemar,
All the changes from Kyesar to Cesar can be accounted for, see my Ladakhi Gramma ,
Lntroduction, Kyirmo = girmo.

465
7. yzhis dang ynaskyi 
mjalthsul de
ynyendrung 
rnamskyis byas.
The existence of hearth and home.
Was created by you, our friends.
8. phyi dang 
nanggi 
mjalthsul de
nyo 'am spun 
bdungyis byas.
The fact, that some people are outside and some inside,
Was created by the Nyopas, the soven brethren.
TEXT NOTES
In the original mjalthso is given 
instead of minlthsul, which is
unintelligible. See more examples for eligion of l at the end of a syllable
in nay Ladakhi Grammar, laws of sound 4. dbyibs is a word, not so
easily 
understood , two kinds of dbyibs are mentioned in XIII, they
are nammkha, sky, heaven, and chos, religion. B . 5. skyeser, name
of the wind god. May be either skyegear, the reborn one, hoe Kosar
Myth, or skyebser, producer of coolness.
TRANSLATION 
NOTES
A. 8. This question refers to the scene orsa ted by the arrival of the
Nyopas. B. 2. The sun is often called an umbrella on account of bis
circular shape. 3. Though the moon as 
representative of the night
can be made to account for the North, it is difficult to see her relation to
the South.
B. 4. Perhaps on account of the fact, that clouds show great
varieties of altitude. 5. A strong draught ie felt in every valley.
Song No. IV .
A .
byonraba 
yin ,
This is about the origin (of the Nyopas).
IV. A 1. 'adir byon rnams shargyi glingnas 
yongatsana
shar 
phyogs rgyalpo suzhig bzhugs
bran dang 'akhor yyog cila dkar
dbyibs dang 
chalugs cinda 'adra.
When you came here from the eastern country,
Who was king there in the East ?
Why may we call his subjects and servants white ?
What is their shape and custom like i

466
yongstsana
2. Thoyi phyogsnas 
Tho phyogs rgyalpo su zhig bzhugs
bran dang 'akhor yyog cila dkar
dbyibs dang chalugs cinda 'adra .
When you care here from the southern country,
Who was king there in the South ?
Why mar we call his subjects and servante wbita ?
What is their shape and custom like ?
yongstsana
3. kyed rnams nubkyi glingnas 
rgyalpo su zhig bzhugs
nubphyogs 
bran dang 'akhor yog clla dkar
dbyibs dang chalugs cinda 'adra.
When von une here from the Western country,
Who was king there in the West ?
Why mas we all his subjerts and servanta white !
What is their shape the custom like ?
kved rnams byanggi glingnas yongstsana
rgyalgo su zhig bzhugs
byangphyogs 
bran dang 'akhor your cila dkar
dbyibs dang chalugs cinda 'adra.
When will be here fra the northern country,
W210 was hung there in North ?
Why not we call his subinets and vervants white ?
What is their ship ' tici custom like ?
B .
phimas landu.
T : + op 18 , 11:4r:
IV . B . 1. ngacag nyebo rnams shargyi glingnas yongstsana
rgyalpo yul 'aknor srung
sharphyogs 
bran dang 'akhor yyog chosla dkar
bdelegs 'adug
dbyibs dang chalugs 
ydugs nyima mchis
sharna khri 
skad cig 'adrina deta dris,
When we mume ne from the eastern country,
Yul 'akhor srung * * king them in the East.

467
For the sake of their religion we may call his subjects and
servants white.
Their shape and custom are good.
In the East there dwells the sun , the umbrella of the throne.
If you wilnt to hear some news, ank him !
nga nyebo Thoyi glingnas yongstsana
lho phyogs rgyalpo 'aphags skyed bzhugs
bran dang 'akhor yyog chosta dkar
dbyibs dang chalugs bdelegs 'adug
Thona 'abru sna 'adzommo dg 'a
skad clg 'adrina dela dris.
When we came here from the southern country,
'aPhagsskyed was king there in the South.
For tho sake of their religion we may call his subjects and
servants white.
Their shape and custom are good.
In the South they enjoy all kinds of grain,
If you wish to hear some news, ask that!
3. nga nyebo nubkhyi glingnas yongstsana
nub phyogs rgyalpo spyan mig bzang bzhugs
bran dang 'akhor yyog chosla dkar
dyibs dang chalugs bdelegs 'adug
nubna sman sna 'adzommo adug
skad cig 'adrina dela dris.
When we came here from the western country,
sPhyanmig bzang was king there in the West.
For the sake of their religion we may call his subjects and
sorvints white.
Their share and custom are good.
In the West there are all kinds of medicines.
If you wish to hear some news, ask them !
ngacag nyebo rnams byanggi glingnas byongstsana
byang phyogs rgyalpo 'aphags skyed bzhugs
bran dang 'akhor yyog chosla dkar
dbyibs dang chalugs bdelegs 'adug
byangna thsos sna 'adzommo 'adug
skad cig 'adrina dela dris.

468
When we came here from the northern country,
'aPhagsskyed was king there in the North.
For the sake of their religion wo may call his subjecte and
servants white.
Their shape and custom are good,
In the North there are all kinds of dyes,
If you wish to hear some news, ask them .
Text Votes.
according to the views of
A. 1. etc. cin da, ought to be spelt 
about'. The names of
Ladakhis ci mda, mda (or perhaps 'ada) meaning 
the kings mean, B. 1. protector of the country. 2 and 4. tho high-born
one. 3. good eye. Very likely the original name of 4 had been lost and
that of 2 was inserted instead. Each verse may also have a seventh
med , we
bshadrgyu 
ramsla skadcha 
concluding line: ngacag nyebo 
friends do not know any news; 'adzommo = 'adzompo, plentiful. Instead
of bdelegs the original has bdelags.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
A. I, etc. White is the colour of the Tha's and of all good things.
B. As regards the products of the difforent countries, they are mentioned
in about the same manner in ladakhi Songs No. XV, Harvest festival
Skyurbuchan. They are perhaps more of a practical than of a
at 
interest.
mythological 
The three names, givon in this song, do not seem to be of Tibetan
Lökapālas.
origin . They are probably the Tibetan names of the Indian 
origin of this
Though there can be no doubt as to the pre-Buddhist 
gong as a whole, the names of the kings may be later Lamaist interpola
tions. I am rather inclined to believe, that an ancient version of this
bong had the names of those kings, who actually reigned in the respoctive
regione many years ago. In this connection it may be added, that in
Song No. X , where the four points of the compass come in again , actual
mentioned .
kingdoms, for instance China and India , are 
geographical 
Regarding the names, given in IV, compare Grünwedol, Mythologie des
Buddhismus, p. 181; spyanmig bzang, instead of mig mi bzang, is
probably a corruption, as it does not correspond to the Indian
Virüpäksha.

469
Song No. V.
A ,
berraba yio . phyimas.
This is about the sticks. The Nyopas say:
V . A . 1. Shing stagpa skyerpa shugpa ysum .
The birch, the alp-willow and the cedar,
2. de yum shing dang ma rdungshig .
With sticks of these three kinds of wood do not beat us!
3 . de yum shing dang rdung zerna
If you beat ve with these three kinds of wood,
4. mgoyi ldem 'achagna Idem 'achag stong dang len
Breaking our helmets, you must return them a thousandfold,
5. luskyi phe ralna pheral stong dang len
Hurting our body, we shall return it a thousandfold,
6. snyangyi yyu 'achagna yyu 'achag stong dang len
Breaking our earrings, you must return them a thousandfold,
'oggi sga 'achagna sga 'achag stong dang ten.
legs bsame dbanggi nyebo.
Breaking our saddles, you must return them a thousandfold !
Well thought, you mighty friends!
B .
nangmas landu People of the house say:
V . B. 1. bdaggi lagtu yodpai shing yyu Icang Idempa 'adi
This elastic stick of the turquoise willow, which is my band,
'akhrungsa rgyagar yuldu 'akhrungs
Arose in India, its birth-place.
3. thsarsa bodyul dbussu thsar
It grow in dBus in Tibet, its growing place.
4. lcugstod serpo yserla yod
Its flexible yellow upper half looks like gold.
5. rtsemo sngonmo vyula byas
Ite blue tip was made of turquoise.
6 . Ibayi dbangpo rgya bzhinnas
By the king of the gods, rGya bzhin ,

470
7 . Icags rgyabpai bk'a khrol cig
was issued ) an order to beat (with it).
(There 
8 . 'adila bk 'alung yang dagpa zhig ynang zerna
If you ask, what holy prophecy he gave regarding it,
9. ayi zlai buzhig 'abrangs
A son of sun and moon may follow (you)!
10 . zla skar mdundu mchis
The moon and the stars may be before (you) !
11. don ngan phugssu 'akhrugs
Bad speech ought to be blamed.
12. phu ngan duba che
If (the fire) is badly blown, there is much smoke.
13. mgron ngan ringdu mchis
A bad guest be far away !'
14 . rinchen dbyugpas char cig phob
Now let go down a rain (of blows) with the costly sticka,
15. nam bz'a rincangyi Idurcig phob.
Beat them on their costly dress!
TEXT NOTES .
A . 4. Idem , said to be the golden hat of the Nyopas, is called Idem
either on account of its stiff shape or because of its being an emblem
(allegory) of the sun. As will have been noticed in the preceding songs,
the Nyopas have to play the part of the sun god. 5. phe = phye
perfect tense, of 'abyedpa , to open , thus ‘ if you beat an opening of the
body ', '& wound ', the verb being used as a noun:
B . 3. thsarsa, finishing place, when applied to inen, it is the
country, where maturity is attained. 4. yserla yod, it belongs to gold .
5 . ryula byas, it was niade (turned ) into turquoise. 9. 'brangs =
'abrengs, imperative tense. 10. Instead of mdundu the original has
dondu, instead of mchis it hay ches and che; the same must bo said
of mchis in B. 13. nambz'a, Ladakhi for nabz'a. Idur perhaps the
same as Idur Idur in Jäschke's Dictionary.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
Becalise at the end of each verse in IV. the Nyopas failed to give
a satisfactory account of the four countries, this is taken as a sufficient
IIP

471
cause to beat them . For their defence they recite V . A., VI, A., and
VII. A., and find fault with the sticks. On the other hand, the bride's
party praise their sticks as having been approved of by the king of
heaven V. B., a king of the earth VI. B ., and the king of the underworld
(waters) in VII. B .
B. 9 and 10 is said to refer to the procession of the wedding party.
Song No. VI.
A .
phyimas. The Nyopis 
say:
VI. A , 1. shing grama glangma Icangma ysum
The furze, the hill willow and the house willow
2 . de yaum shing dang ma rdungshig
With sticks of these three kinds of wood do not beat us!
3. de youm shing dang rdung zerna
If you beat us with these three kinds of wood.
4. mgoyi ldem 'achagna ldem 'achag stong dang len
Breaking our helmets, you must return them a thousandfold .
5 . luskyi phe ralna pheral stong dang len
Hurting our body, we shall return it a thousandfold,
6. snyangyi yyu 'achagna yyu 'achag stong dang ten
Breaking our earrings, you must retwr them a thousan<ifold !
7. 'oggi sga 'achagna sga 'achag stong dang len.
legs bsams dbanggi nyebo.
Breaking our saddles, you must return them a thousandfold !
Well thought, you mighty friends!
B .
nangmas landu Perple of the house answer:
VI. B . I. bdaggi lagtu yodpai shing yyu lcang sngonpoi
Of this green stick of the turquoise willow, which is in my
hand ,
2. skyedpa sngonpo yyula byas
The blue middle was made of turquoise .

472
3. lo 'adab 'adzamgling mi yul khyab
The leaves of the tree cover All 'aDzamgling the country of
mon.
4 . rje sabdag rgyalpo bzhinpas
By the king, the owner and lord of the earth.
5 . lcage rgyabpai bk'a khrot cig.
(There was issued ) an order to beat (with it ).
'adila bk'alung yang dagpa zhig ynang zerna
If you ask, what holy prophecy he gave regarding it,
7. rgyalpoi bu zhig 'abrangs
'A son of the king may follow (you)!
zlaskar mdundu mchis
The moon and the stars may be before (you)!
9. don ngan phugssu 'akhrugs
Bad speech ought to be blamed,
10. phu ngan duba che
If (the fire) is badly blown there is much smoke!'
11. mgron ngan ringdu mcbis
A bad guest be far away!
rinchen dbyugpas char cig phob
Now let go down a rain (of blows) with the costly sticks,
13. nam bz'a rincangyi Idur cig phob .
Beat them on their costly dress.
TEXT NOTES.
In B . two lines seem to have been lost, because for all the rest this
song is in conformity with V . B. or perbaps V. B . 2, 3 are later additions.
In 4 the king is mentioned as representative of the earth, an older version
may have had Mother sKyabs bdun, compare Song No. I. B. 2, ante,
p. 134.
TRANSLATION NOTES,
B . 3. 'aDzamgling or 'aDzambugling, comprised originally
Tibet and India , later on all Asia or the whole earth, in the latter sense
it is to be taken here. It is the Indian Jambu-dvipa.

473
Song No. VII.
A .
phylmas The Nyopas say:
VII. A . 1. shing starbu 'umbu thserbu yeum
The walnut-tree, the tamarisk and the thorn,
de 7 sum shing dang ma rdungshig
With sticks of theso three kinds of wood do not beat us!
3. de yum shing dang rdung zerna
If you beat us with these three kinds of wood,
mgoyi ldem 'achagna lden 'achag stong dang len
Breaking our helmets, you must return them a thousand
fold ,
5 . luskyi phe ralna pheral stong dang len
Hurting our body, we shall return it a thousandfold,
anyangyi yyu 'achagna yyu 'achag stong dang len
Breaking our earrings, you must return them a thousand
fold,
7. 'Oggi sga 'achagna sga 'achag stong dang len.
Breaking our saddles, you must return them a thousandfold !
B .
nangmas People of the house say :
VII. B . 1. bdaggi lagtu yodpai shing yyu Icang sngonpoi
Of this groen stick of the turquoise willow , which is in
my hand,
2. rtsaba dkarpo dungla byas.
The white root was made of a shell.
3. sbathag 'og phyogs kluyal khyab
The roots (of the tree) cover all the lower underworld .
4. klurgyal Icogpo m 'a gros zilchennas.
By the wise and glorious ICogpo, King of the Underworld ,
5. Icags rgyabpai bk'a khrol cig
(There was issued ) an order to beat (with it).
'adila bk 'alung yang dagpa zhig ynang zerta
If you ask, what holy prophecy he gave regarding it,

474
7 . klu phranbu zhig 'abrangs
A young kLu may follow (you)!
8 . yul thsa mdundu mchis
The village idol may be before (you )!
9. dọn ngan phunsu ºakhrugs
Bad speech ought to be blamed .
10. phu ngan duba che
If (the fire) is badly blown, there is much smoke.
11. mgron ngan ringdu mchis
A Ab
bad guest be far away !'
12. rinchen döyugpas char cig phob .
Now let go down a rain (of blows) with the costly sticks,
13. nambz'a rincangyi Idur cig phob ,
Beat them on their costly dress !
TEXT NOTES.
VII. A . l. 'umbu = 'ombu, tamarisk . B . 7. phran is generally
uwd only of young animals . In II the original has song, go, instead of
mchio be. This fact is perhaps the best justification for my putting
mchus in the place of che and ches of the original,
TRANSLATION NOTES.
If we look at '. B. 4, VI. B. 2, and VII. B. 2, we see, that the
kick of the turquoise willow is identified with the tree of the world ,
which we find in so many mythologies. The roots of this tree cover
the underworld, VII. B. 3, the leaves cover the earth VI. B. 3, and the
top reaches stanglha.
Song No. VIII.
A .
phyimas. The lyopas say:
VIII. A . 1. skyaba zanthsan dang 'ulu thsigs
bcad dang yogpa snanag dang
The soup-spoon , the gravy-spoon and the black-nosed
poker,
2. de ysum shing dang ma rdungshig
With these three sticks do not beat us!

475
3. de yaum shlag dang rdung zerna
If you beat us with these three sticks,
4 . mgoyi Idem 'achagna Idem 'achag stong dang len
Breaking our helmets, you must return them a thousandfolii,
5 luskyi phe ralna pheral stong dang len
Hurting our body, we shall return it a thousandfold,
synangyi yyu 'achagna yyu 'achag stong dang len
Breaking our earrings, you must return them a thousand .
fold ,
7. 'oggi sga 'achagna sga 'achag stong dang len.
Breaking our saddles, you must return them a thousandfold !
B .
nangmas lan ma shespas yang phyimas
Because the people of the house do not know what to
answer, the Nyopas say:
VII. B . 1. nged nyebo rnamala rdungbai shing zhig yod
shing hala Idempai shing zhig yod
shing hula ldempai shing zhig yod
shing rtsaba ycigia rtsemo ysum
rtsemo ysumla yalga drug.
A wood to beat us, friends, does exist.
It is a wonderfully elastic wood ,
It is a marvellously elastic wood.
There is a tree, the root of which has three stems.
These three stems have (together) six boughs.
2 . yalga dangporu
bya chen khyunggi thsangs
yser sgong ma bcagpa
bya thsangs ma bshigpa
bya de ma 'agrogspa
shing de snamnas byon
de dang rdung mdzod cig
de dang rgyob mdzod cig
de dang rdung mdzodna
mgoyi ldem 'achagnayang
idem 'achag stong meddo
Juskyi phe raina

476
pheral stong meddo
snyangyi yyu 'achagnayang
ygu 'achag stong meddo
'oggi sga 'achagnayang
aga 'achag stong yang med.
On the firist bough
There is the nest of the huge bird khyung.
Not breaking the golden ogg,
Not destroying the bird's next
Not frightening the bird ,
Take a stick and come!
With this stick do beat us!
With this stick do whip us !
If you boat us with this stick,
Breaking our helmets,
You need not return them a thousandfold .
Hurting our body,
We shall not return it a thousandfold .
Breaking our earrings,
You need not return them a thousandfold .
Breaking our saddles,
You need not return them a thousandfold !
3. yalga ynyisparu
byargyal rgodpoi thsangs
vyu sgong ma bcagpa
bya de ma 'agrogspa
bya thsangs ma bshigpa
shing de snamnes byon
de dang rdung mdzod cig , etc,
(Soo v. 2.)
On the st'cond bough
Thore is the nest of the wild eagle.
Not breaking the turquoise egg,
Not frightening the bird,
Not destroying the bird's nest,
Tako a stick and come!
With this stick do beat us! etc.
(See v. 2.)

477
yalga ysumparu
mgobo ldad dkar thsange
dung skonº ma bcapa
bya thsangs ma bshigpa
bya de ma 'agrogspa
shing de snamnas byon
de dang rdung mdzod cig , etc.
On the third bough
There is the nest of the bird 'white head '.
Not breaking the pearl-white egg,
Not destroying the bird 's nest,
Not frightening the bird,
Take a stick and come!
With this stick do beat us ! etc.
yalga bzhiparu
glagmo mkhal dkar thsangs
dngul sgong ma bcagpa
bya theangs ma bshigpa
bya de ma 'agrogspa
shing de snamnas byon
de dang rdung mdzod cig, etc.
On the fourth bougis
There is the neat of the eagle 'white kidney'.
Not breaking the silver egg,
Not destroying the bird's nest,
Not frightening the bird ,
Take a stick and come!
With this stick do beat us ! etc.
6 .
 yalga Ingaparu
ribya gongmoi thsangs
byur sgong ma bcagpa
bya thsangs ma bshigpa
bya de ma 'agrogspa
shing de snamnas byon
de dang rdung mdzod cig , etc.
On the fifth bough
There is the nest of the snow partridge
Not breaking the coral egg.

478
Not destroying the bird's nest,
Not frightening the bird,
Take a stick and come!
With this stick do beat us! etc.
7 .
 yalga drugparu
khraskya dkarmoi theange
lcags sgong ma bcagpa
bya thsangs ma bshigpa
bya de ma 'agropspa
shing de snamnas byon
de dang rdung mdzog cig, etc.
On the sixth bough
There is the nest of the white falcon .
Not breaking the iron egg,
Not destroying the bird's nest,
Not frightening the bird ,
Take a stick and come!
With this stick do beat us ! etc.
TEXT NOTES.
A . I. The expressions given here are colloquial Lower Ladakhi for
ROUP-spoon, table-spoon and poker. B . l, hala = halas, kula the same
8,8 hal , risemo means originally 'top'. 2. sgong = sgonga, egg.
The termination pa in bcagpa, bahigpa and 'agrogopa is Ladakbi for
par, the supine being wed here in a gerundial sense. 5. mkhal dkar,
white kidney, i.e . the foathens over the kidney are white . 6. ribya,
another name of the same bird is lhabya.
TRANSLATION NOTES.
This song seems to contain a further description of the tree of the
world . It is remarkable that the tree of the world is said to have six
boughs, for I have not yet met with the number six in other books
relating to Bonpa Mythology. In this connection I should like to
mention that according to the Edda there are six animals (a goat and
five stage) feeding on the leaves of the tree of the world , and that the
Edda (not Simrock ) speaks of six worlde.

479
Song No. IX .
A
IX . A . 1. Khyed nyebo me ma khrul
Now , friends, lo not let the fire fall down!
da nang yongba gangnas yongs
Now , you, who enter, from where do you come ?
'agroba nyidcag gangdu 'agro
Then, where will you go to ?
4. sdodpai bde lce gangna yod
Where will you be pleased to sit down ?
5 . dgospal skudon sula yod
08
For whose sake do you come?
yzhungyul 'adriru cila byon .
Why did you come here into the middle of the village ?
B .
phyimas. The Vyopus say :
IX. B. 1. yong da ngazha sharphyogs bdechen glingnas yongs,
We come from it happy country in the East,
'agro da ngazha nubphyogs urgyan glingdu 'agro
W go to the country of the paradise in the West.
3. sdodpai bdelce de sa ynas 'adina yod
We shall be pleased to sit down here .
4 . dgospai skudon ni yzhungyul 'adina yod .
legs bsams dbanggi nyebo .
Our aim is here in the middle of village.
Well thought, you might v friends!
TEXT NUTES.
8. 1. me ma khrul, do not let the fire fall down, proverbial expres
bion, for do not break down now , show your ingenuity !'. 4. The original
bas sula instead of gangna, the lines 4 and 5 }aving been confounded.
B. 2. urgyan , here in Lower Ladakh is understood to mean either
Padmasambhava or the Western Paradise'. 1 and 2 again show
plainly, that the Nyopis have to play the part of the sun.

TRANSLATION NOTES.
This song IX is generally the conclusion of the scene before the
house , the Vyopas are invited to enter and tell the name of the girl.
Then the bridal party, the Nyopas and the whole village, sit down for
a great feast, when the Chang glu (the continuation of the wedding
song given above) is sung. On the following morning a Buddhist Lama
Appears and reads a scripture portion from an orthodox Buddhist book.
People tell me tliat he may read anything he likes, because neither the
Lama por the bride is able to grasp the meaning, and the chief thing is
the correct pronunciation . Then the bride and the Nyopas mount
their horses and ride to the house of the bridegroom , where another
feast is given.
Conclusion .
Having thus arrived at the end of the first intelligible half of the
wedding ritual, it will be as well to add a few words about the other
loss intelligible half, though the latter is not yet ready for publication .
After a study of the verses contained in it, which can be understood
fairly well, I have come to the conclusion that the so-called second
half of the ritual is not the continuation of the first but a composition
a part. It is in reality a new ritual dating from the time of the
introduction of Buddhism into Ladakh, and is an attempt to replace
the ancient Bonpa ritual by another, which , though not entirely Lamaist,
tries to introduce Buddhist ideas by placing them side by side with
Bonpa ideas. That this compromiso has proved a failure, is shown by
the fact that people have never been able to grasp it in full and are now
on the point of abandoning it altogether.
As might have been expected, my interpretation of the Kesar Myths
has beon «riticised i as being unscientific. There can be no doubt
that there are no scientific means available to prove the solar origin
of many a hero. It is so much easier to prove the descent of all of them
from great ancestors. However, à certain amount of commonsense,
now and then speaks in favour of a solar descent. In my notes to
Wedding Song No. I, 1 said that the name of the northern Loka
pāla Donyodgrubpa could not well be explained as a manifestation
1 This remark refors only to private letters from certain professors; if I had
had the pleasure of seeing Prof. Dr. Grünwedel's most interesting review of the
hesar Myth (published in the Globus, August, 1900 ), I should certainly have
modified my expressions.

481
of the sun , but my critics have helped me to bring him into the system .
From the Kesar Myths we learn, that Kesar, the supposed spring-hero ,
had a different name before his birth on earth, that is, during winter.
Then, whilst in heaven, he was called Dongrub , 'the fulfiller of the aim '.
This name is, 50 to say, a prophecy, it indicates the future doings of
the hero. There can be no doubt that the year and the day have certain
parallels, and the winter of the year corresponds to the night of
the day. Is it wonderful then , that the Lokapāla of the north (i.e. the
place where the sun is during night) should have the same name as the
spring-god during winter ? Donyodgrubpa means 'the fulfiller of
the aim , he has'. The original name Dongrub was changed into a four
ayalla bled one simply to bring it into accordance with the four-syllabled
names of the other Lokapálas. Thus we see, that the name of the
supposed spring-hero Kesar, before his entering into action is in
accordance with the name of the sun before his starting his day's work .
Does this fact not suggest a possible solar origin of Kesar?
Hitherto certain school especially have considered it scientific to
compare the mythologies of certain nations only with those of such
nations as are related to them by language. However, religion overlea pe
the barriers of linguistic relationship, and there is no necessity to believe
that a solar mythology had been worked out by a single nation and
was carried to others by her missionaries. On the contrary, solar
mythologies may have arisen in many countries and later on the different
nations have borrowed one from the other. The existence of the
Nibelungensage not only among the Uigurs, but also among the Tibetans
is an established fact. Compare G . N . Potanin : Vostocnyje motivy v
srednevěkovym jevropejskim epose, Moscow, 1899.
1 Just like the Wundermärchen.

THE PALADINS OF THE KESAR-SAGA. A COLLECTION OF
SAGAS FROM LOWER LADAKH .
By A . H . FRANCKE.
Preface.
The following tales, which I call Sagas of the Paladins of the
Kesar -saga, were dictated slowly lix the same man who dictated the
'Lower Ladakhí Version of the Kesar-saga ', and were written down by
the Munshi of Khalatse, Yeshes rig 'adzin . The sagas contained in the
present collection are not considered by the people to be of the same
importance as the Kesar-Hage proper, but they are interesting enough
to the European student of Tibetan folklore as throwing new light on
the Kesar-saga. According to iny conception , the present sagas constitute
parallels to the Kesar-saga, as were told in side-valleys. Some of the
Agus appearing in them look exactly like Kesar himself under a low
name. When these tales were united with the principal Aaga , k ar
under & different name (i.e. the Azu) had to become a son or servant
of Kesar under his own name. In the first of the tales, however, we find
Kesar under his own name, and the tale reminds us in many parts
decidedly of Kesar-saga, Tale No. 1 , Kesar's defeat of the giant of the
North
Tale No. 1 .
The Tale of Kesar's Beloved Mon.
Abstract of Contents.
Kesar had a Mon (low-caste man) whom he loved more than anybody
else. The Agus became jealous and killed the Mon on the occasion of
a hunting party which they had undertaken in his company, by pushing
him from a high rock . Kesar went to find him and heald a voice speaking
out of his corpse. Therefore he opened the Mon 's belly with a knife ,
and out of the corpse came two Mons, & male and a female one which
1 Extract from th Journal and Proceedings of the wil Nor. Bengal. Vol. II,
1906, pp. 407 -449. The Tibetan Texts are not reprinted

483
le carried home in his loin cloth . Both were some sort of devils who
required a great amount of food . At first the Agus had to feed them ,
but when their supplies were finished , the Mont-devils were entrusted to
grandfather rT'se dgu . This old hermit gave them much work and little
food . Once they found a lump of goki and a turquoise of the size of a
hearth -stone. These treasures they prosentent to the hermit, asking
him to increase their food and give them less work . He, however, did
the opposite, then he was of opinion that they would find him more
treasures if he was hard on them . Then the two devils fled to a poisonous
lake in which they bathed , with the result that their appearance became
perfectly diabolic. One of their teeth grew down to the earth and another
up to the sky, and they received locks of blood -red colour. They attacked
the hermit in his house, but Kesar was sent to rescue him . When they
had told their tale to Kesar, the latter advised them erroneously to go
to the land of the Nāgas and devour its inhabitants. This was a slip
of the tongue, for he had intended to send them io the land of the devil.
When the misery of the Nāgas became very great, they were advised
by their sorcerers to send two of their ladies, Dargyi yang mdzesma, and
Dargyi mthong mdzesma, to Kesar, to ask him to come to their assistance.
These two Nāgini went towards the land of g Ling and put up 100 black
and 100 white tents. First of all, Agu Khrai mgo khrai thung was sent
against them . The ladies took the shape of bears, and the Agu rán
away before them , wounding his horse with his own sword in his fright.
Then Agu dPalle was sent, but he also fled before the bears. Still he
found out that they were females. Therefore he gave the advice that
'a Bruguma ought to be sent to the tents. She was well accepted and
asked by the Nāgini to send King Kesar to them for some time. Kesar
agreed to that, saying that 'a Bruguma would probably repent her promise.
Thon 'a Bruguma was ordered to fetch Kesar's borse from the cold (or
straight) valley. But the horse behaved awkwardly and would not come.
By throwing a stone at it with a sling, she succeeded after all in mounting
it. But thon the horse went off in the most extraordinary way, carrying
her up to the sky, and then dragging her along mountain ridges, 'a Bruguma
spending most of the time below the belly of the horse, with the result
that, when they arrived after all in the stable, the back of the horse
was sore. Then 'a Bruguma went to her father and mother, angry.
Kenar healed the horse with the medicines which were always ready for
use in the horse's ear, and took 'a Bruguma back to the castle. There
she had to clean all the harnesses and other armature which Kenar

484
intended to take along with him on his expedition . Then 'aBruguma
sang a song in which Kesar is praised as & being from whom light, dew ,
and flowers proceed. Kesar answered with a song.in which he said that,
although leaving as a young man , he would return as an old man. Kesar
was led by 4 fox to the land of the Nāgas. He punished the two
Mon-devils and sent them to the land of the devil to eat there all the
poisonous snakes. Then he played at dice with the brother of the two
Nágini, Yang mdzesma and mThong mdzesma. Thus nine years elapsed .
But then the Näga had a difference with Kesar and called him , 'Forgetter
of gLing '. That very night Kesar saw his horse in his dream . He
went to look after him the next day and found him after a long time,
The horse advised him not to accept the food which was to be offered to
him by the Nāgini, as it was poisonous, and they rode off in the direction
of gling. Two days before arriving there, Keser took the shape of &
wolf, and soon met with Agu d Palle who had taken the shape of a sheep .
But the latter recognized Kesar and blamed him for not hurrying home,
as bKā blon Idanpa hal taken possession of the castle of gling and
'n Bruguma, and killed Ag mDa dpon gongma. Therefore Kesar took
the shape of a begging monk and went to the gling castle to ask alme.
He told 'a Bruguma that he had heard news of Kesar's death in the land
of the Nāgas. 'a Bruguma liked that news and gave him a little room
to sleep in . At night Kesar surprised 'a Bruguma in the company of
Kā blon Idanpa. The latter was suspended in a cage, but released when
he made over his property to Kesar. Also 'a Bruguma was forgiven and
re-accepted.
Tale No. 11.2
The Tale of Skyaba Rgodpo .
Abstract of ( imtents.
Agu Skyaba rgod po of g Ling went a-hunting and met with the
great king of Groyul. They became friends and arranged that their
children were to marry each other. Both their wives were with child,
and, one day, when Skyaba rgorpo found a gollen bow and arrow , and
the king of Groyul a mother-of-pearl spindle, they knew that the former
was to get a baby-boy, and the latter a baby-girl. They agreed that
1 There is a very similar passage to this in Kesar-saga, 'Tale No. V , Kesar's
victory over the giant of the North . Bibliotheca Indica .
2 katruet from the Journal and proceedings of the Amit. Soc. Bengal, Vol. III.
1907. $ . 67.05.

485
the names of their childron were to bo Gromo so dkor (black brown with
white leath ) for the girt, und Skyava dkarpo (whito la lle) for the boy.
Then they played at dice for seven days about their children , to find
out, who of the two was to become the master of the house. The result
was that Skyala ryodpo's boy was to bo master, anel that the girl was
1:0 i cept him , even if he shold be very poor. Then the whole contract
was writton by Skyaba rgod po with his own blood and hidden beneath
his saddle. On hiy way home, Skyaba rgodpo was swallowed by a wild
yak , and the horse arrived in the stable alone.
When Skyaba rgodpo's boy was born and grown up, he decided to
leuve his home and go to find his father. He saddled his horse and
discoverol the marriage contract. From a high hill he saw a yak grazing
and asked him what kind of food he liked best. The yak replied that
he liked the flesh of men and animals best of all, and that he would
not eat grass unless he could not get the former. Next morning the
boy killed the yek with seven arrows and opened his belly . Out of it
came a number of men whom the yak had devoured, and also the boy 's
father. The latter, however, died soon. His corpse was burnt over
three arrows and deposited in a spur khang (corpme house).
Then the boy decided to go to gain his bride from Groyul. In a
counsel with king Kesar, the following Agus received orders to accompany
the boy, dPalle god po, Khrai mgo khrai thung, Anggar ltsangspa ; Mi
yulla medpai) Grod pa che ; Lag lag rings, Kang rkung rings. Before
arriving in Groyul, they came to a great lake. Agu d Palle made a great
duinpling of one bushel of flour and sat down on a boulder to eat it.
Then a beautiful girl with a golden water-pot appeared on the opposite
shore, and Agu dPalle asked her where the castle of the king of Groyul
was, and whether the expected daughter had been born to him or not.
The girl asked in return what he wanted to do with the king and his
daughter and advised him to fly across the water or to swim through it.
dPalle went wading through it, but a short distance before reaching
the shore, he pretended to be carried away by the current, and the girl
ran to his assistance. She said that she was the daughter of the king
of Groyul, but that she was not willing to show the way to the castle,
as she was afraid he would revenge himself on her (for having been
unkind to hum ). dPalle spent the night in the house of two field labourers,
and when all the Agus had arrived , he went with them before the king
i The question is whether the boy is to be a bagpo who provides a wife for himself,
or & magpa who is asked by the girl, whilst she reinains mater in her father's house.
12

486
of Groyul, and lemanded his daughter as bride for Skyaba rgodpo. The
king said that he would give her to him who was able to point her out,
when she was in the company of one hundred other girls. Agu d Pulle
was able to do that, for Ane blur dianmu, the Queen of Heaven, who
had taken the shape of a golden fly, descended on the forehoud of the
king's daughter. Thus showing whom he must point out. The king
of Groyul, howover, was not yet rearly to part with his daughter, and
said , he would give her to him who could cat one hundred carcasses at a
sit down. This feat was performel by Agu Grodpa che (great stomach)
who even ate the bones of the animals. Then the king wil, he would
give his daughter to him who was able to carry one laundred .jugs of water
from the sea to the castle within a day. This was done by the Agus
Lag lag rings (Long hand) and r kang rkang rings (Long leg). Then there
was still a delay ; for the wedding was postponed , until the uncle of the
bride had arrived and the Nyopas 1 were brought together. The uncle
arrived after thirty days and the Nyopas spent seven days with singing
the Ritual and three clays with singing the Drinking Song 2
Before the Agus started with the bride, Agu d Palle, in a song,
demanded the bridal presents which were presental. Also, the treasures
of the castle followed after the bride, but a portion of them was returned
to her relations. Lu the desert, Agu dPalle provided the party with
water, which he dug out of a moist spot. Agu Khrai mgo khrui thung
was sent in advance to prepare the people of gling for the event. They
came with many Nyopas to meet the bride. Then there was a second
wedding feast, and the country remained in a happy state .
Tale No. III.3
The Tale of Shelli Buzhung.
Abstract of Contents.
When Kesar was oll, there was a little boy in the castle of gling
called Shelli bu zhung (*the little boy of Crystal') who had no father.4
Nyopes are the honorary buyers of the bride: see ' A Lower Lulaklui Marriage
Ritual', Indian 4 nigry , 1901.
2 Noo The Drinking Songs of Khalutbo , Tibetan Text: printed at Leh, 1901.
3 Extract from the Jourut ml Proceedings Ariat. Soc. Bengal, Vol. III,
1907, pp. 261-263.
4 Just as konar had rat human father, his boy was also supposeci to have ono.
Comparo A Lower Ladakhi Version of the Kosor-baga ', Tale No. II.
12B

487
It was found neceseary to provide a bride for him , and as the hermit
rT'se dgu was the only person likely to know a suitable bride, a little
servant-boy was sent to ask his advice. The boy received a letter
authorizing him to ride on the horse Dunggi dur dkur, which was in the
care of Agu Zlaba bangpo . This Agu wag 1,050 years old and had a
son called Zlaba dkarpo. Zlaba dkarpo could not believe that the horse
was to be entrusted to the little servant-boy, and went before king
Kosar together with the boy, to make special enquiries. But Kesar gave
the same order once more, and the child was carried by the horae before
the hermit's house, after it had jumped with him so close to the sun
that the boy got almost burnt. The hermit , however, was offenderl,
because Kosar hal sent a little boy instead of a proper Agu. But the
boy was carried by dragons directly before the hermit's house. Then
he made a bow and arrow and frightened the old man. The latter real
Kenar's letter and said that the bride of Kesar's son , rayalsa dkarpo,
was to be born to the king of Groyul, whose castle was on the top of the
three realms of the world . She was to be born together with many
powerful jewels. He gave the advice to make friends with the grand
mother who took care of the garden below Groyul; and prophesied that
the bride would be obtained, although one of the Agus would lose his
life in the task (m Di dpon gongmuu ). When the answer of the hermit
was brought to the castle of gLing, a Bruguma did not like the news, and
entreated Kesar to select a bride from the daughters of the country:
He, however, went off with his son. When they arrived half-way to
Groyul, they met with the Nyopas (buyers of the bride) of many countries
who wished to gain the daughter of the king of Groyul for themselves.
They took night-quarters at the grandmother's house. The son first
frightened the grandmother by burning her garden down, and then
appeased her by restoring everything in a miraculous way. During
night, when the daughter of the king of Groyul was born , the earth was
filled with light. But the boy had a bad dream and believed that the
daughter of an ogre had been born . However, the grandmother com .
forted him , saying that the daughter was a fairy, and that tho Nyopa,
of many countries had already arrivedl, desirous of gaining her. Also
the new -born daughter of the king of Groyul har a dream , in which she
saw two men and an ogress (the female Agu dPal moi astag) of terrible
shape, arrive, and carry her off by twisting her hair round a spear. But
her mother comforted her, saying that it was a good dream , and that
she way to become the wife of king Kesar's son .

488
The boy rGyalbu rgyalsa wished to ride to and break the hazaar of
Groyul, which consisted of bell-metal; but did not succeed . He therefore
asked his father to lend him the horse rKyang rgod dbyerpa . Riding
on him , he broke the bazaar of boll-metal to pieces. This was the signal
for the people of Groyul to send their army against the men of gLing.
The first whom Gyalbu rgyalsa met was Lag dmar blon chen . Although
Lag dmar blon chen was on the opposite shore of a lake, he was killed
by & miraculous war dance of the boy, when the drums used for the
dance went off guddenly and entered into the body of the giant. The
second hero of Groyul was Mig dmar. He went to fight the boy of gling
in spite of his wife's warnings. He tumbled into the water which was
between the combatanta, on account of the strong wind produced by the
horse Kyang rgod dbyerpa with his wings. Then they decided on a
contest in arrow -shooting. The heavy arrow of the giarit split the rocks
Asunder; but the light arrows of the boy caused so much wind that the
giant was thrown into the water a second time. Then the giant and the
child rode a race. The giant arrived at the goal first and cooked some
tea. But the boy, although he arrived a little later, had his tea sooner
ready. Then they rode a race to the top of a mountain . On the same
day also a Buddha and a Bonpo priest had betted who would be first
on the top of the same mountain . The Buddha and the boy of Ling
both arrived there first. From the top of this mountain the child
pronounced a blessing, according to which the countries were to be
filled with what they are famous for in the eyes of the Ladakbis : China
with silks of the dragon pattern ; Central Tibet with tea ; Yarkand with
horses; the West Tibetan lake-district with salt and wool; Purangs
with beautiful girls; Ladakh with tiger-like heroes; Zanggkar with
yaks; Purik with Gro dkar flowers; Baltistan with apricots ; Kashmir
with rice! Then the boy killed the giant by snipping with his finger
against the giant's forehead , and ordered him to be reborn to a female
Kyang of fifty years of age.
Kesar went with his son to the engagement-beer of the King of
China's daughter and sat down on a throne of sticks. The maid-servant,
Gochod, offered the beer and told the guests to drink it without touching
the pot.1 As the honoured guests, who sat on thrones of gold and silver,
were unable to perform the task, she considered it fuperfluous to ask
1 The game scene ocoure in 'A Lower Ladakhi Version of the Kogar-gaga ',
Tale No. III.

489
the two men of gling to try. Howevor, the boy prayed her to offer
the beer to him and gave her a new name. Then he threw the pot
towards the sky with his stick , and the beer was consumed by the 360
gods and nāgas. Thus the girls were won by the men of g Ling. But
when the boy exhibited his great power, the heroes of Groyul would
not give him the princess and sent the giant Riva (or Ribo) blon chen
Against him . The boy flod before the giant, as a partridge flies before a
falcon. Therefore Kesar took tho shape of a crow and asked d Palmoi
astag (the female Agu) to come to his assistance. She went to fight
the giant and asked Agu mdā dron gongma to come also. The giant
was defeated by the woman in a great arrow and spear contest; but
when he fell down, m Di doon gongma happened to come under the
giant's thumb and was smashed .
During this combat, the son of the King of China (rGyanıg) hal
carried off the bride to his own country. Therefore Kesar, his son , and
the Agus, went to China. A grandmother made the arrangement that
on the day of the prince of China's wedding to the princess of Groyul,
dPalmoi astag, who had taken a beautiful shape, was to be marriel to
tho minister of China. But when the wedding dance was perforined ,
dPalmoi astag started a war-dance, followed by Kesar and the other
men of gling. During this dance, they killed the king of Chin: sunki all
his men , and the female Agu put her spear in Shel Idang lhamo's hair,
which she twisted round it , and dragged the girl out of the castle on
the road to gLing. Only after long entreaties by the whole party and
tho goda was she willing to let the girl ride on the horse of her bridegroom ,
Then a message was sent to gling with two doves, and a great wedding
was celebrated on the hill Tisuru (Kailasa).
Tale No. IV .1
The Tale of Gongma Buthsa 's Boy and Gyalsa d Karpo.
Abstract of Contents.
Old Kegar went to a hermitage and left the governinient in his soll
Gyalsa dkarpo . The latter had a difference with his wife Shc Idung
lhamo. To find out who was wrong, Kesar sent two storks to watch
the couple. The latter heard Shel Idang lhamo abuse the family of Kesar
1 Extract from the Journal and Proceedings Asint. Soc. Bengal, Vol. Ill,
1907, PP. 321-323.

490
by calling them 'descendants of a smith '.1 When they brought this
nows to Kesar, Shel Idang lhamo was turned out of the castle and Agu
Khrni mgo khrai thung, who wished to mend his bad repute by a good
Ideeal, was sent to the hiermit ? T'se dgu to ask him from whence to get
another wife for Gyulsa d Karpo. The hermit answered that a suitablo
princess could be obtained from Ljung, which country is situated on the
frontier between sum and moon, anci advised the Agu to circumambulato
round wDeī dipon yongma's stūpa, until a lizard would appear and nod
with the level. This le might take an an assurance that his sin in killing
i huyu wils forgiven. When the hermit's answer was brought to gling,
riyalso a firpo anul the Agus started for Ljang.
Ini di pogongwa's son , called Gongma buthad, wished to accompany
the heroes and went first of all to find his horse called Kyang Khra
inelong. He found it in a valley and recognized it by a flame which
procede ! from its forehead . It refused to come, until he threw atones
ill, it willi i miraculo118 sling. He threw three stones at a time. The
first broke the hor of the wild yak Curulugu to pieces, the second
killed the mother inate and the third made a hole in the foal's ear,
Attor a feast had been given , the boy, riding on + Kyang Khra melong,
filloral Viyalsa dkarpo and the Agus, he himself riding in the sky.
The first who saw him come was Agu Miggi rab tha , but Agu dPalle
woull not believe until the boy arrived. The boy had at once a difference
with Agu dPalle, but the two combatants were separated by Gyalea
atkarpo. Soon king Lho krab arrived on his way to Ljang, as he also
wished to gain the princess of that country. He had two heroes with
him ; one's name was Mi dbang ral chen and the other's Mi dbam, rul
chung. The latter was sent first to fight against the men of gting .
He was opposed by Gongma buthsa ; but the boy was hit twice by Mi
dbang ral chung's spear, first in the head and then in the brennt. Ho
was healed by Ane Kur dmanmo who extracted the spear. Then he
prayer to his father m Dā dpon gongma and received from him good
advice, in particular, which arrows to use. With these arrows ho killed
Vi dbang ral chung. In consequence of this defeat, king Lho krab with
his followers went off to his own country .
To conquer Ljang, however, the assistance of the female Age was
necessary, and Agu d Palle was despatched to fetch her. He found her
1 Compare 'A Luwer Ladakhi Version of the Kesar.Baga ', Tale No. 1. The
present tale proves beyond doubt that forefather Krashis and Smith Kroshis
Are identical,

491
sporting in dPal yul (Nepal) together with a friend. After some trouble
he persuaded her to come. Two yaks, mother and daughter, who
offered themselves as food to the ladies, were advised to go to dPalmoi
astag's valley in the North -West, as they would be safest in that valley,
The army of gLing went before the castle of Ljang, but could not
induce the men of Ljang to fight. Therefore mDā dpon gongma's son,
who is suddenly called rNa jyu rna rtsal, went off to find a means. He
(liscovered a girl crying in a hut below the castle of Ljung and asked
her why she cried . She said , the reason was that both her husbands
bLonpo mig dmar and Mi dbang ral chung had been killed by men of
gling. She added that it would be possiblo to induce the men of Ljang
to fight, if the servant-girl who carried the water to the castle was killed.
In acknowledgment of this good advice Na jyu ma rtsal in a miraculous
way caused the girl to be re-united with b Lonpo mig dmur in a castle on a
far-off plain .
When in the morning the water-carrying girl came (apparently free
the castle of Ljang, the passage is not quite clear), the boy killed the
girl. The people of Ljang came in search of the murderer and the boy
betrayed himself by showing the jewel which he had taken from the
girl. He was thrown into prison. Once three fishes which had been
offered to the king, laughed ; and the boy pretended to know the reason
why. He said the fishes had laughed because the queen was in steret:
union with the king of the Nāgas. When this was found ont te be
untrue the boy was condemned to death. Then the men of Ljuny ( ukl
not agree with regard to the kind of death. Therefore the boy propioset!
to them to fetter him and burn him alive.
Whilst preparations for the execution were madle, the men of gling
became troubled where mDa dpon gongma's son remained , and , to find
him , sent to his younger brotherl who took the shape of a row . Whers
mDã dpon gongma's son in his fotterect condition saw luis younger brotier,
he asked him to tell Ane bkur dmanmo to send his forse. The horse
arrived and remained unseen to the men of Ljung. Suddenly the buy
mounted it and killed many men of Ljung. Then he returned to the
army of g Ling and admonished it to advance.
The daughter of the king of Ljang, who was married to the king of
Lho krab, advised her father to use the power of the jewel Tom ljug,
by which, everybody could be kept motionless in that very place and
position , which he just occupied . Thus the whole arny of gling was
1 Apparently, the passage is not quite clear,

499
kept bound by unseen fetters. Agu Khrai mgo khrai thung was accident.
ally away, and , therefore, escapel the magic spell. By stealing he
provided food for luis fettered companions and kept them alive by feceling
them in their helpless positions. Then he took the shape of a cat and
went into a mouse-hole, where he found the mice celebrating the wedding
of their king. Ho scized the king and minister and was attacked by
all the mice who ate his flesh. But although nothing but bone remained
he did not release his captives, till the mice restored his flesh and promised
to steal the jewel I'on ljug. Thus the whole army of gling was delivered .
On their way back to yLing, mDa dyon's son said he would go to Lho
krab anul fetch the princess. He placudd a firebrand in the tail of &
fox and threw the fux into the Lho krub vastle, which consisted of sealing
wax and melted. Thus the princess of Ljang was gained and united with
rGyulsa d Karpo.
At the celebration of the wedding the princess' food was restored in
a miraculous way, whilst the prince's was not. Kesar took this as
proof that the girl was of latter character than his son, became angry
amil left the couple alone in the wilderness. Then the two separated ,
What girl gong buki to Ljung and the boy to gLing. But as the latter
clid not klase to deplore the loss of his new bride, he was once more
allowed to go anx ! fotch her. He took service in the Ljang castle ; but
whatever work he did , as cow-herd , dog-herd, etc., it was accompanied
by much blessing. Once he saw in a picture of a miraculous mchod rten ,
how much he was missed by the people of gLing, and the couple decided
to run away. Through & spell he caused the treasures of Ljang to adhere
to his body and carried them off. The couple was followed by the army
of Ljung, but rGyalsa dKarpo beat them and made a pond of blood
which he surrounded with a wall of bones. Then a crow was sent to
gling to give news of the arrival of the couple and a great wedding was
celebrated.
Tale No. 7.1
Appendix.
The Tale of ySerri buzhung.
Note.
The tale of ySerri buzhung being extremely similar to the last part
of the tale of Gongma buthea's boy and Gyalsa dKarpo, I do not consider
1 Extract from the Journal and Proceedings Asiat. Soc. Bengal, Vol. III, 1907,
p. 381.

493
it necessary to give the Tibetan text, as it shows again how far certain
versions of the Kesar-eaga may differ from one village to another. The
tale of yßerri buzhung represents the Sheh version. It was told by
Zarra of Sheh, and written down by Shamuel Joldan of Leh . It has
ncĆ yet been published in its original form . A small number of copies
arranged form , suitable for school use.
of it were printed in an 

494

